

--- [Page 1] ---

This paper is included in the Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Symposium 
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation.
May 4–6, 2026 • Renton, WA, USA
ISBN 978-1-939133-54-0
Open access to the Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Symposium  
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation is sponsored by
FRCC: Towards Provably Fair and Robust  
Congestion Control
Anup Agarwal, Carnegie Mellon University; Venkat Arun, University of Texas at Austin;  
Srinivasan Seshan, Carnegie Mellon University
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi26/presentation/agarwal-anup


--- [Page 2] ---

FRCC: Towards Provably Fair and Robust Congestion Control
Anup Agarwal, Venkat Arun†, Srinivasan Seshan
Carnegie Mellon University, †University of Texas at Austin
Abstract
Congestion control algorithms (CCAs) play a critical role
in network bandwidth allocation. Recent work [3] showed that
a large class of CCAs, including BBR, Copa, and Reno, starve
flows in the presence of network jitter. Starvation occurs
because CCAs coordinate fairness by encoding fair rates into
congestion signals. For example, Reno’s throughput scales as
1/√
loss rate. Even a small amount of noise in these signals
leads to large errors in inferring fair rates.
We present FRCC (Fair and Robust Congestion Controller),
the first CCA that provably bounds unfairness (avoids starva-
tion) even under network jitter. Our key insight is to encode
only the flow count (or equivalently, the fair link fraction) into
the congestion signals, and independently estimate the link
capacity to calculate the fair rate. In this way, we bound jitter’s
impact on fairness. We implement FRCC in the Linux kernel
and evaluate it in a variety of network conditions, including
synthetic jitter, heterogeneous RTTs, and multi-bottleneck
settings. FRCC closely matches the bounds predicted by our
theoretical analysis, and consistently achieves fairness, even
when state-of-the-art CCAs exhibit starvation.
1
Introduction
End-to-end congestion control algorithms (CCAs) play a criti-
cal role in allocating network bandwidth. Finding a good CCA
is a challenging and long-standing problem in networking.
Fairness, in particular, has been hard to achieve. While the
community desires fairness across different CCAs [5, 15, 30,
35], and explored sophisticated notions of fairness that incor-
porate application-level objectives [10, 26, 29, 37], existing
CCAs fail to provide even the simplest property: per-flow fair-
ness even when all flows use the same CCA. Fig. 1 and Fig. 2
show how Cubic [16], BBR [7] and Copa [5], three widely
deployed CCAs, experience extreme unfairness between flows
as a result of differences in ACK aggregation or round-trip
propagation delays (RTprops)1; phenomena that are common
on the Internet. Appendix E shows unfairness in other CCAs.
The starvation theorem [3] suggests that these are not
isolated failures.
The theorem states that any CCA with
small self-induced delay or delay variation can starve in the
presence of jitter (from sources like ACK aggregation or OS
scheduling delays). To our knowledge, all existing CCAs that
1BBR’s unfairness is different from RTT unfairness in traditional
CCAs [16, 18]. For BBR, a small difference in RTprops leads to arbitrarily
large unfairness as the link rate goes to infinity [3].
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
Tput (Mbps)
FRCC
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
Tput (Mbps)
BBRv1
Figure 1:
Throughput (Tput) of three flows with round-trip
propagation delay (RTprop or R) of 10, 20 and 30 ms. BBR starves
the (blue) flow with R =10 ms.
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
25
50
75
Tput (Mbps)
FRCC
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
25
50
75
Tput (Mbps)
BBRv1
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
50
Tput (Mbps)
Copa
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
50
Tput (Mbps)
Cubic
Figure 2:
Three flows with RTprop = 32 ms. The blue flow
experiences 32 ms of ACK aggregation. Copa and Cubic starve flows.
are buffer-bloat resistant (i.e., bound delays) cause little to
no self-induced delay variations and, therefore, starve. This
happens on realistic paths as shown above.
We ask if there exists an end-to-end CCA that sidesteps this
result to provably bound unfairness and the maximum delay,
albeit at the cost of large (enough) self-induced delay and delay
variations. We design FRCC (Fair and Robust Congestion
Controller), the first such CCA with formal guarantees of
fairness and efficiency under the same pessimistic, worst-case
model used by [3]. With this, we can be confident that our
design is robust in any real networks that can be emulated by
the worst-case model, which includes components like token
bucket filters and ACK aggregation.
Starvation occurs because of the way existing CCAs
coordinate with other competing flows. They do not know
how many other flows exist and cannot directly communicate
with each other. To coordinate what is the fair rate, CCAs
(implicitly) agree on a contract that encodes the fair rate into
observable congestion signals. For instance, Reno uses fair
rate ∝1/√
loss rate [25]. Because of such coupling, even
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2755


--- [Page 3] ---

small noise in the congestion signals translates to large errors
in inferring fair rates, potentially causing flows disagree on
the fair rate creating unfairness. To our knowledge, all existing
CCAs that share bandwidth fairly incorporate such a map in
their design, either implicitly (e.g., Reno [25], Vegas [24]),
or explicitly (e.g., TFRC [12], Swift [21], Poseidon [34]).
FRCC incorporates two key ideas to enable fairness in the
presence of jitter. First, rather than coordinating fair rates
through congestion signals, FRCC coordinates flow count or
fairlinkfractions. Flowsindependentlyestimatethebottleneck
link capacity to know if the fraction of link they currently con-
sume is more or less than the target fraction encoded in the con-
gestion signals. Flows adjust their cwnd to consume the same
fraction of the link as communicated in the congestion signals.
This reduces the bits of information communicated through
congestion signals, thereby reducing the impact of noise.
Second, capacity estimation is notoriously hard ([11],
§ 5.3), often requiring large probes for high accuracy. Our
key idea is that FRCC only needs the capacity estimation to be
accurate enough for flows to know if their current link fraction
is above or below the target fraction. We precisely compute
how large and long our probes need to be to build an accurate
enough capacity estimator. This creates the delay variations
that we know are necessary to sidestep the pre-conditions in
the starvation theorem [3].
Our proofs model the execution of FRCC as a dynamical sys-
tem, describing both its transient and steady-state performance
(§ 6). We cover a range of scenarios from ideal links (without
jitter), links with jitter, and even flows vastly different RTprops
and multiple-bottleneck links. To exhaustively reason about
network behaviors, we use a number of analysis tools, includ-
ing the Z3 SMT (satisfiability modulo theory) solver [27], and
numerical methods [32]. Our formal approach also uncovered
previously undocumented behaviors in cwnd-based CCAs that
occur due to ACK-clocking (§ 5.3.2) and are unrelated to jitter.
These are interesting in their own right independent of FRCC.
We implement FRCC in the Linux kernel and empirically
evaluate it. FRCC’s behavior closely matches our theoretical
analysis for all the challenging scenarios listed above and
consistently achieves fairness and efficiency, even when
state-of-the-art CCAs exhibit starvation (e.g., Fig. 1, Fig. 2).
Note that our goal was to investigate if it is possible to
design a CCA that operates at the limits of existing theoretical
tradeoffs. FRCC’s current design does not consider important
practical issues such as coexistence with other CCAs,
shallow-buffers, etc. (§ 2). Further, we had to make several as-
sumptions (listed in Appendix C) to make our proofs tractable.
We conjecture that our results are true even without these
assumptions as supported by our empirical evaluation (§ 7).
We have open sourced our code at https://github.com/
108anup/frcc/tree/main described in Appendix A.
Bottleneck link
Scenario A
3 Mbps
1 Mbps
Bottleneck link
Scenario B
S1
S2
1 Mbps
S1
3x 1 Mbps
S2
Above target
Below target
Current loss rate,
target rate
Figure 3: [Left] To distinguish between the two scenarios, the red
(lower) flow must coordinate with the green (upper) flows. [Right]
Reno uses loss rate to communicate fair rates.
2
Related work and motivation
Starvation theorem statement [3]. On networks with
jitter, no end-to-end CCA can simultaneously achieve three
desirable properties: (P1) avoid starvation, i.e., ensure a finite
bound on the ratio of flow throughputs (s-fairness in [3]), (P2)
scale to arbitrarily large link capacities (f-efficiency in [3]),
and (P3) incur only small self-induced delay variation (delay
convergence in [3]).
This result applies only to end-to-end schemes, not to those
relying on in-network support (e.g., XCP [20]) or active queue
management (e.g. fair queuing). We focus on end-to-end
CCAs because in-network mechanisms have been historically
hard to deploy: explicit schemes require header changes (via
IP or TCP options), which risk packet drops at legacy routers
and incompatibility with encryption [14].
Goal. Our goal is to design a CCA that bounds unfairness (P1)
and scales to arbitrary link capacities (P2). To do so, we give
up (P3) and create “large” self-induced delay variations.
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 illustrate the importance of (P1) and
(P2). They show common Internet scenarios where starvation
(P1) occurs even at modest link rates of 100 Mbps (P2). For
example, two users in a household may have different RTprops
when downloading from separate CDNs (e.g., YouTube and
Amazon CloudFront, both using BBR), causing one flow to
starve. Likewise, when one user connects via Ethernet and
another via WiFi, the resulting differences in jitter lead to
starvation under Cubic, Reno, or Copa.
Note, “large” in giving up (P3) is a relative term. The delay
variations need to be larger than the amount of jitter in the
network, but their absolute value can still be small. Hence,
we can still bound the maximum delay we create and avoid
buffer-bloat unlike traditional CCAs like Reno and Cubic.
Existing delay bounding CCAs either do not create delay
variations at all or their variations vanish with increasing link
capacity. Consequently, their unfairness increases with the
capacity, culminating in starvation.
Starvation freedom is a challenging theoretical problem. To
date, no delay-bounding end-to-end CCA has been proven to
avoid starvation, particularly when faced with arbitrary jitter
patterns as modeled by the CBR-delay network model (Fig. 13
and [3]). The model is intentionally pessimistic to account
for a wide range of network behaviors. Designing a CCA for
it will make it robust to all modeled behaviors.
2756    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 4] ---

Non-goals. Beyond our primary objectives of bounded
unfairness, high utilization (scaling to arbitrarily large
bandwidths), and bounded maximum delay (and delay
variation), our secondary goal was to design a practical CCA.
We partially achieve this goal. FRCC converges exponentially
fast to both efficient and fair rate allocations (its convergence
time is O(NGlogBDP) RTTs), where NG is the number of flows.
We do not address other properties that may be desirable
for a CCA, including, coexistence with other CCAs, operation
under shallow buffers, handling losses (including detection,
recovery, and reaction), or short/application-limited flows.
Our analysis assumes buffers are sufficiently large to avoid
loss. Here, sufficiently large is relative to the amount of jitter
and not RTprop. Specifically, FRCC maintains a steady-state
queueing delay of O(NGD) (§ 6). Where, D is the amount
of jitter we want FRCC to tolerate. If RTprop = 100 ms,
NG = 4 flows, and D = 10 ms, FRCC needs 4×10 = 40 ms
of buffering. In contrast, CCAs like Reno/Cubic/BBR need
O(RTprop) or 100 ms of buffering. We recently showed that
buffering smaller than jitter is also an extremely challenging
scenario involving an additional tradeoff between amount of
packet loss and convergence time [1].
Similarly, our community has luxurious desires from CCAs,
including coexistence with legacy TCP [5, 15, 30, 35] and
sophisticated fairness notions based on latency or application-
visible metrics [10, 26, 29, 37]. However, today’s CCAs fail
to ensure even basic flow-level throughput fairness on simple
dumbbell topologies where all flows are using the same CCA.
We need to solve this before pursuing higher ambitions.
Contracts. The starvation result stems from the way CCAs
coordinate fair rates with each other. CCAs do not know the
number of competing flows. To determine their fair rate, they
must establish some form of agreement. Consider the scenar-
ios in Fig. 3. If the green (upper) flow in scenario B exactly
emulates the cumulative effect of the three green flows in sce-
nario A, then the red flow cannot tell the difference. Without
disambiguating the scenarios, the flow cannot have different
actions (sending rates) in the two scenarios. Yet, its fair rate
is different (1 and 2 Mbps in scenario A and B, respectively).
In practice, the red flow assumes the green flow is cooperat-
ing through a “contract”—an a priori agreed-upon encoding of
fair rates into observable network signals. For example, Reno
uses the contract function “rate = const/√
loss rate” [12,
25]. While this is not explicit in the algorithm, the emergent
behavior is that all flows measure the average packet loss rate
and calculate a “target rate” using this formula. Then they
update their actual sending rate to move towards this target
(Fig. 3). Returning to scenario B from Fig. 3, both the red
and the green flows measure the same loss rate, and hence,
have the same target rate, but they have different sending rates.
Thus, at least one of them will adjust their rate until they reach
equal sending rates in steady-state.
To our knowledge, all existing CCAs employ similar
coordination methods, though the signals they use and the
Discrepancy
in fair rate
Bounded error
in link fraction
1
Figure 4: [Left] Noise creates discrepancies in inferring fair rates.
The discrepancy increases with increasing link capacity. [Right] Link
fraction gets rid of the asymptote on the Y-axis, ensuring bounded
error in inferring fair link fraction for bounded jitter.
shape of the contract function may vary. E.g., Vegas, FAST,
Copa, and Swift, use delay instead of loss [5, 6, 21].
Why does the starvation occur? The issue with this coordina-
tion is that rate gets coupled with noise in congestion signals.
The contract maps a small range of congestion signals to a
large range of rates. As a result, even small noise in congestion
signals creates large errors in inferring fair rates, causing
different flows to disagree on what is the fair rate (Fig. 4). This
disagreement increases with increasing link capacity, and due
to the asymptote on Y-axis, creates arbitrarily large ratios of
flow throughputs (starvation) for arbitrarily large capacity.
3
Key insights to overcome starvation
Why do strawman solutions fail and key learnings. From
Fig. 3, to coordinate fairness, we need some form of contract
(e.g., rate-vs-delay mapping). And, the asymptote in such
contracts is the main culprit causing starvation (Fig. 4). The
problem is that there is no rate-vs-delay curve that (1) is
asymptote-free, (2) scales to arbitrarily large rates, and (3) is
monotonically decreasing. Monotonic decrease is needed as
increasing rate with delay creates a positive feedback loop.
This explains why decades of research have failed to resolve
starvation: no amount of noise filtering or parameter tuning
can eliminate the asymptote. At high link capacities, even
microsecond-level jitter causes large divergence in the inferred
fair rates. Adjusting parameters only shifts the asymptote
rather than removing it. For example, Vegas uses the contract
rate = αVegas/delay.
Increasing αVegas allows Vegas to
tolerate up to 10 ms of jitter on a 100 Mbps link by maintaining
a 10 ms queueing delay. However, this tuning dramatically
increases delay at lower capacities—e.g., 1 s of queueing at
1 Mbps—and the asymptote resurfaces at higher capacities
(e.g., 1 Gbps). Similarly, changing the contract shape (e.g.,
rate =1/delay2 [21]) does not eliminate the asymptote, and
contract proposals such as “rate =Cmaxe−delay” [3] only elim-
inate the asymptote by give up scaling to arbitrary bandwidths.
First key insight. Instead of relying on a contract that
coordinates the fair rate across flows, we split the challenge
for determining fair rate into two parts. Our first insight is that
inter-flow coordination should focus on the fair link fraction,
i.e., the fraction of the bottleneck link that flows should
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2757


--- [Page 5] ---

occupy in steady-state. For example, we use the contract:
“target_link_fraction = min(1, D/delay)” (shown in
Fig. 4). This eliminates the asymptote in the contract since
the link fraction is naturally bounded by 1. Consequently,
bounded noise in delay measurements creates bounded errors
in inferring the fair link fraction. Here, D is a tunable bound
on the amount of network jitter that we want to tolerate.
Each flow updates its cwnd to ensure that the fraction of
the link it consumes is equal to the globally observable target
fraction, so that in steady-state, all flows occupy the same
fraction of the link (fairness). Flows increase their cwnd if their
current fraction is less than the target and decrease otherwise.
Second key insight. The above requires that flows estimate the
fraction ofthe linkthey currently consume. One way to achieve
this is by estimating their throughput and the bottleneck link ca-
pacity, i.e., current_fraction = throughput/capacity. To
estimate capacity, flows can “probe” the link by temporarily
increasing their cwnd. However, estimating link capacity is a
surprisingly difficult problem [11, 22, 23], with accurate esti-
mates requiring large probes (§ 5.3). Our second key insight is
that our capacity estimates only need to be accurate enough for
flows to determine if their current fraction is above or below the
target so that they can change their cwnd in the correct direction.
We precisely compute how large capacity probes need to
be, allowing us to make our probes, and hence, delay variation
smaller than otherwise needed (§ 5.3). Specifically, our probes
increase the cwnd by:
E =
throughput
target_fraction ·γD
(3.1)
where γ > 1 is a constant. This probe increases queuing
delay by E/C seconds, i.e., all packets packets have to wait
behind (the transmission delay of) the increased inflight. The
starvation theorem does not apply to this design due to the
resulting delay variation.
This probe is large enough for us to compare the target
and current fraction. The intuition is that when the target and
current fractions are close (their ratio is close to 1), the flow’s
throughput ≈target_fraction ∗C. As a result, the probe
size (Eq. 3.1) is close toCγD, and creates γD delay. Jitter can
only impact the expected delay by ±D. If the measured delay
is more than γD+D, then the probe must have created more
than γD delay, which can only happen if the flow’s throughput
is larger than the target fraction of the link. Conversely, if the
excess delay is less than γD−D, flow’s throughput is smaller.
When all flows’ excess delays are close to γD, they consume a
fraction of the link that is close to the target fraction (fairness).
Summary. We use delays larger than jitter to (accurately
enough) coordinate fair link fractions, and delay variations
larger than jitter to (accurately enough) estimate link capacity
(and current link fraction). These allow us to ensure that
the link fractions of all flows (and correspondingly the
throughputs of the flows) are close to each other (fairness).
Probe
slot
Cruise
slot
RTprop
probe
Simultaneous
probes (collision)
Transient
perturbation
Figure 5: Timeseries of FRCC’s cwnd and RTT.
3.1
Leveraging the insights
We combine these insights to build a practical congestion
control loop. For reference, Alg. 2 in § B.1 provides FRCC’s
pseudocode. For convenience in implementation and analysis,
we perform a change of variables:
current_flow_count=1/current_link_fraction
target_flow_count=1/target_link_fraction
FRCC tracks estimates for four independent quantities: (1)
RTT ( d
rRTT), (2) RTprop (bR), (2) throughput (\
rtput), and (4)
link capacity (bC), where d
rRTT−bR gives delay. These give us
the current (c
NC) and target (c
NT) flow counts as:
c
NC =
bC
\
rtput
and
c
NT =ContractFunc( d
rRTT−bR)
(3.2)
Where ContractFunc is our contract function (§ 5.1).
Since we cannot simultaneously measure all four quan-
tities [7], we use a structure similar to BBR [7] to obtain
estimates over time (Fig. 5). We divide time into rounds,
which are further divided into slots. There are two types of
slots: (1) probe and (2) cruise. Each flow independently selects
exactly one slot in the round as its probe slot. Flows make this
choice uniformly randomly and freshly for each round.
In the probe slot, FRCC temporarily increases cwnd to
estimate link capacity (bC). In the cruise slot, FRCC retains
its cwnd to measure throughput (\
rtput) and RTT ( d
rRTT). In
addition to the slots, every TR = 30 seconds, FRCC flows
launch a synchronized RTprop probe to empty queues and esti-
mate RTprop (bR), similar to BBR [7]. To ensure synchronized
draining, we assume clock synchronization (through the Net-
work Time Protocol) to keep implementation simple, though
we could use BBR’s implicit synchronization as well (§ B.4).
Finally, at the end of the probe slot, FRCC updates cwnd to
move the current and target flow counts closer to each other.
Note, we use a cwnd instead of rate to keep a closed-loop
system and bound queues. We pace packets at the rate of
2·cwnd/bR to avoid transmitting bursts while ensuring we do
not get rate-limited. This is a common-case optimization and
does not affect performance under worst-case jitter.
2758    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 6] ---

4
Design requirements
Notation. We use hats to denote estimates (e.g., c
NCi, c
NTi)
and no annotation to denote true values (e.g., NCi, NT), and
subscript of i for flow fi. We drop the subscript when clear
from context. You can find our glossary in Table 1 and Table 2.
Desired bounds. Flows update their cwnd based on their
local estimates, c
NTi and c
NCi. To ensure throughput ratios are
bounded, we need to ensure: (D1) the target flow counts of all
flows are within a multiplicative bound of each other, and (D2)
each flow is able to infer when its true current flow count (NCi)
(inverse link fraction) is multiplicatively far from its local
target (c
NTi). On combining these, the true current flow count
(inverse link fraction) NCi is close to local target (c
NTi), which
is close to the single true global target (NT). So the true link
fractions (NCi) (and thus throughputs) are close to each other.
Meeting D1/D2. From Eq. 3.2, bC and \
rtput affects error in c
NC
and the shape of our ContractFunc affects how errors in delay
( d
rRTT −bR) propagate to c
NT (D1). Finally, errors in both c
NC
and c
NT affect (D2). It is challenging to directly reason about
necessary error bounds on the four individual estimates to
meet (D1/D2). We build bC using our second key insight (§ 3)
and we build other estimates d
rRTT, bR, and \
rtput to be the best
achievable under our error model below. We then show that
our estimates are indeed sufficient to meet (D1/D2). We do
this by encoding all the error bounds in the Z3 SMT solver [27]
and show that FRCC converges to bound fairness (§ 6.3).
Error model. We need to consider three sources of errors:
(E1) network jitter, (E2) RTT (and throughput) variations
due to a combination of multiple hops (§ 5.3), difference in
feedback delay (RTprop) of flows (§ 5.3), and interleaving
of packets across flows (§ B.3), and (E3) self-induced delay
variations due to our capacity probes.
Tolerating E1/E2. (E2) errors are unrelated to network jitter
and even occur on smooth, non-time varying links. In two in-
stances, we were able to model these and mitigate their impact
(§ 5.3, § B.3). Outside of these two instances, we treat (E2)
same as (E1). We design FRCC to tolerate a bounded (config-
urable) amount of cumulative errors due to (E1) and (E2). We
model these errors as non-deterministic (or arbitrary) similar
to prior work [1, 3, 4], as opposed to stochastic (or random).
Arbitrary delays (as opposed to stochastic delays) can express
causal effects and correlations, allowing us to be provably
robust to a number of sources of jitter in real networks [4].
Tolerating E3. (E3) affect us in two ways. First, when a flow
probes, it temporarily inflates RTT and reduces throughput
for other flows, potentially skewing their estimates of d
rRTT, bR,
and \
rtput. Fortunately, these are one-sided errors: RTTs only
increase and throughputs only decrease. We filter them by com-
puting d
rRTT and bR as the min over RTT samples, and \
rtput as
the max over throughput samples collected in cruise slots. This
bounds additive error in d
rRTT (best achievable under (E1/E2)).
For \
rtput, we measure throughput over packet-timed RTT
0
10
20
30
40
Queuing delay estimate (delay)
0
10
20
30
40
Target ﬂow count, NT
(current delay,
target flow count)
current flow count1
current flow count2
Contract (NT = delay/θ)
Figure 6: Contract used by FRCC. FRCC updates cwnd so that the
target and estimated flow counts move towards each other.
intervals (i.e., the interval starts with sending a packet and ends
with receiving its ACK) which bounds multiplicative error
(also the best achievable [1]). We show in § B.3 that measuring
throughput over other (even potentially longer) intervals is
either sub-optimal or provides no additional benefit.
Second, if two flows probe for capacity together, their
induced delays add up and they misestimate capacity (bC). Our
round and slot design is specifically to address the second
issue. Probing in exactly one slot of the round reduces the
likelihood of simultaneous probes from multiple flows (§ 5.4)
and helps retain fairness despite probe collisions.
5
Design
We begin by describing FRCC’s contract which governs its
steady-state performance (§ 5.1). Then we describe how we
perform cwnd updates to reach this steady-state (§ 5.2). The
remaining subsections detail the design of our estimates and
slots (§ 5.3, § 5.4, § B.4). In these, tolerating the error bounds
directly guides our design of estimates: c
NT (§ 5.1), bC (and c
NC)
(§ 5.3 for (E1/E2), and § 5.4 for (E3)). We covered d
rRTT and
\
rtput in § 4, and bR in § 3 and § B.4.
5.1
FRCC’s Contract
We use the contract (Fig. 6):
Flow count=ContractFunc(delay)=delay/θ
(5.1)
We interpret it in two ways: (1) “target flow count as a
function of current delay” (NT = delay/θ), and (2) “target
delay as a function of current flow count” (delay = θ·NC).
The constant θ>0 denotes the seconds of delay we maintain
per flow in steady-state, and amount of noise we tolerate: ∆R of
noise in delay creates ∆R/θ of additive error in c
NT. Increasing
θ increases error tolerance at the expense of delay. In steady-
state, without jitter, NT = NC = NG, where NG is the ground
truth number of competing flows (§ 6.2). I.e., all link fractions
(and throughputs) are equal and there is θNG of queuing delay.
Past CCAs have employed different contract shapes, e.g.,
linear (Copa/Vegas/FAST, delay=1/rate [5, 6, 36]), square-
root (Swift, delay = 1/√
rate [21]), square (Reno [18, 25],
loss_rate = 1/rate2). The shape affects three metrics [2]:
(M1) delaygrowthwithflow count, (M2) tolerance to jitter, and
(M3) fairness with multiple bottlenecks (e.g., Reno achieves
minimum potential delay fairness, while Copa/Vegas/FAST
achieves proportional fairness [31]). Since a single choice
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2759


--- [Page 7] ---

affects all these metrics, they are at odds with each other [2].
While our contract bounds additive error in c
NT, we only
needed to bound multiplicative errors (for D1 in § 4). The
logarithmic contract, delay = θlog(NC), gives the optimal
tradeoff between delay (M1) and noise tolerance (M2) [2, 3].
Delay grows logarithmically with flow count and multiplica-
tive error in c
NT is bounded (c
NT =e(delay±∆R)/θ =e±∆R/θ·NT).
However, this creates unfairness with multiple bottlenecks
(M3) (§ 6.5), so we use do not use this contract.
5.2
Congestion window update
At the end of the probing slot, flows update their cwnd to move
the current and target flow counts closer to each other (Fig. 6).
When current exceeds target (c
NC > c
NT), FRCC increases cwnd.
This decreases the current flow count (increases link fraction),
and increases the target (due to the increased delay). Likewise,
when current is below target (c
NC < c
NT), FRCC decreases cwnd.
The cwnd updates are proportional to the gap between c
NC
and c
NT. This enables: (1) exponentially fast convergence to
both efficiency (link utilization) and fairness in O(log BDP)
rounds, and (2) stability, as proportional updates dampen as
FRCC gets closer to steady-state, similar to [17, 36].
Algorithm 1: FRCC cwnd update.
1 Function updateCwnd()
2
c
NT ←( d
rRTT−bR)/θ ▷cwnd ←cwndδH if c
NT =0
3
bC ←E/c
∆d ▷bC ←∞if c
∆d ≤0 (See § 5.3)
4
c
NC ←max(bC/\
rtput,1) ▷As rtput ≤C
5
c
NC ←min(max(c
NC,c
NT/δL),c
NTδH) ▷Clamps
6
target_cwnd ←cwnd·c
NC/c
NT ▷Alternate cwnd update
7
target_cwnd ←cwnd·(bR +θc
NC)/(bR +θc
NT)
8
cwnd ←(1−α)·cwnd+α·target_cwnd ▷α=1
9
cwnd ←ceil(cwnd) ▷Ensures at least 1 packet inflight
10 end
Alg. 1 shows two cwnd updates: line 7 (main) and line 6
(alternate). The main update is more stable and we use it in
all our analysis and implementation. We only use the alternate
update in our proof for the jittery link in § 6.3 as Z3 times out
for the main update (Assumption 6.).
The main update focuses on moving only the “queu-
ing delay” portion of the RTT towards our target delay
from θc
NT to θc
NC.
Intuitively, cwnd maps to “packets in
queue + packets in pipe”. The main update isolates and
scales the term for “packets in queue”, i.e., it is same as:
target_cwnd = rate ∗target_RTT = cwnd/ d
rRTT ∗(bR +θc
NC).
In contrast, the alternate update is more aggressive (less stable)
and scales the entire cwnd. Specifically, the alternate update
requires θNG >R for stability, i.e., the queuing portion of the
cwnd is more dominant than the pipe portion.
Clamps on cwnd. The clamps (line 4 and line 5) help manage
the impact of noise in estimates in three ways. First, while
RTT error
Figure 7: Lines show increasing E. A small range of excess delays
map to a large range of potential link capacities. For C = 600, only
the largest three probes create more than ∆R of excess delay.
without jitter, FRCC converges to a fixed-point, with (worst-
case) jitter, FRCC converges to a region around the fixed-point
(§ 6.3). The clamps (among other parameters, and the amount
of jitter) affect the size of the region. Tighter clamps imply
a smaller region but slower convergence. Second, our capacity
estimate is more accurate for some flows than others (§ 5.3.1).
With worst-case errors, some flows may move away from the
steady-state region. The clamps curb these bad movements.
The onus is on the flows with accurate estimates to bring the
system to convergence. Lastly, clamps help curb perturbations
when FRCC misestimates capacity due to probe collisions.
5.3
Link capacity estimate
Prior work has explored various capacity estimation tech-
niques, including packet-pairs/packet-trains [22, 23] and max
ACK rate [7, 15]. All these methods have known issues, e.g.,
instead of estimating capacity, max ACK rate and packet-trains
may only measure available bandwidth and asymptotic dis-
persion rate [11] when other flows consume a part of the link.
The three sources of errors (E1/E2/E3) make capacity
estimation hard. We elaborate why and describe our solutions.
Specifically, for (E1) we ensure that our capacity probes are
large enough (§ 5.3.1), for (E2) we measure persistent change
in delay created by the probes as opposed to transient change
(§ 5.3.2) and for (E3) we have our slot/round design (§ 5.4).
5.3.1
Probe size
Problem (Fig. 7). Consider the simple estimator we used in
§ 3. It increases cwnd by E packets, and measures the excess
delay created by the probe (c
∆d =∆RTT) to estimate capacity
as: bC =E/c
∆d. When there is no noise, the estimator is correct
(as c
∆d = ∆d = E/C). When there is noise, i.e., c
∆d =∆d±∆R,
this estimator has a similar issue as we saw in Fig. 4. It maps
a small range of c
∆d values to a large range of bC values (Fig. 7).
Small noise in c
∆d (=∆d±∆R) creates large errors in bC. The
same issue happens for an estimator based on the increase in
throughput (or ACK rate) due to probe.
Unless E > C∆R, the excess delay is less than jitter, and
the CCA cannot disambiguate between queueing delay and
noise. C is the quantity we are trying to estimate, so we cannot
set such a probe size a priori, to bound the error in bC and
consequently c
NC. Though it may be possible to binary search
2760    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 8] ---

RTT seen by 
transmitted packet
Pkts part of probe
Initiate probe end
Probe ends
Drain
(RTT)
Gain + Wait
(2RTT)
TP = RTT
Probe starts
Figure 8: Life-cycle of a probe slot.
for such a probe size on the fly.
Solution. We only need to decipher if our current flow count
is above or below target. For this purpose E = c
NT\
rtput·γD
is enough. Under this probe size, if we propagate the impact
of errors from c
∆d to c
NC, we get (derivation in § B.2):
c
NT
c
NC
= \
rtput
rtput
c
NT
NC
± ∆R
γD =γR
c
NT
NC
± 1
γ
(5.2)
Here, rtput and NC are the true throughputs and current flow
count (inverse fraction) of the flow, γR is the multiplicative
error in throughput, and γD controls the tradeoff between the
seconds of delay variation we create, and the accuracy of our
estimate. We get the second equality whenever ∆R≤D. Thus,
the total error in c
NT/c
NC is bounded and the flows update cwnd
in the correct direction when c
NT and NC are far (D2).
Note, the additive error in c
NT/c
NC causes some flows to have
more accurate estimates than others. This asymmetry occurs
in two ways. First, the estimate is more accurate for flows
whose c
NT and NC are far apart (c
NT/NC is too large or too small).
Second, when c
NT/NC ∈(0,1), i.e., additive error has greater
impact than when c
NT/NC ∈(1,∞). In essence, flows getting
more than their fair share have better estimates. While not
all flows may move towards the steady-state region in a given
round, flows that are too fast or too far from the fair share are
more likely to move in the correct direction and update the
global NT to help bring the system to convergence.
Note, bounding multiplicative error in c
NT/c
NC relative to
c
NT/NC, to avoid asymmetries, is same bounding error in c
NC
which requires O(C) probe size as shown above.
5.3.2
Probe timing
With different RTprops, or multiple hops (either bottleneck
or non-bottleneck), probes incur transient variations in RTT
(and throughput) even without jitter. Bottleneck hops are
those that have other competing FRCC flows (Fig. 17), while
non-bottleneck hops do not have any competing flows (Fig. 9).
With different RTprops and multiple bottleneck hops there
is also persistent bias in excess delay, i.e., the ground truth
∆d̸ =E/C. We explain the cause and impact of persistent bias
in § 6.5. Here, we discuss the transient variations. Both the
variations and biases are interesting in their own right, they
even occur in packet-level simulation, and to our knowledge
have not been documented before.
Multiple hops. Fig. 9 shows that the immediate excess delay
created by the probe is more than the transmission delay of the
0
250
500
750
1000
Time (ms)
40
60
80
RTT (ms)
TX
ACK
0
100
200
300
Time (ms)
40
60
80
RTT (ms)
TX
ACK
Figure 9:
Packet trains may not measure the true link capacity.
TX shows RTT of a packet vs. its transmission time, while ACK
shows the RTT of a packet vs. its ACK time. [Top] C1 and C2 are
non-bottleneck hops,C0 is the bottleneck hop. Behavior in left plot
occurs wheneverC1,C2 ≥C0/2. [Left] with extra hop (e.g.,C1,C2),
[Right] with only the bottleneck hop.
0
500
1000
Time (ms)
25
50
75
100
RTT (ms)
TX
ACK
0
500
1000
Time (ms)
25
50
75
100
RTT (ms)
TX
ACK
Figure 10:
Oscillations occur during probes when flows have
different RTprops. The excess delay without oscillations̸ = the
transmission delay of excess packets. Oscillations dampen over time.
Left shows probe of short RTprop flow and right shows long.
0
500
Time (ms)
25
50
75
100
RTT (ms)
TX
ACK
0
500
1000
Time (ms)
25
50
75
100
RTT (ms)
TX
ACK
Figure 11: Paced probes reduce oscillation magnitudes. Left shows
probe of short RTprop flow, and right shows long.
probe. Initially, the sending rate of the probe is higher than the
capacity of the hops. As a result, transient packets queue up at
the non-bottleneck hop, before also queuing at the bottleneck
hop where the other flow is competing. The extra delay sub-
sides when the packets become ACK-clocked in the next RTT.
Different RTprops. Fig. 10 shows oscillations in RTT caused
by differences in feedback delay of flows. We provide intuition
for the case when the longer RTprop flow probes (the other
case is similar). At the start of the probe, the long flow’s
sending rate is high (increased delay). This reduces the ACK
rate (and sending rate) of the short flow. The burst packets
take a while to trigger new transmissions (in response to their
ACKs) as the probing flow’s RTprop is long (decreased delay).
Each time the burst gets paced by the bottleneck and reduces
in rate and eventually dies out.
Design of probe. In lieu of these transient variations, we
make two choices (illustrated in Fig. 8): (1) we increase
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2761


--- [Page 9] ---

and decrease our cwnd over an RTT instead of abruptly (this
reduces the magnitude of oscillations (Fig. 11), and (2) we
wait for two RTTs before starting to measure excess delay.
This eliminates the variations due to multiple hops, but the
feedback delay based variations may not fully vanish.
We account any oscillations that do not vanish under (E1).
This is okay because these oscillations are bounded indepen-
dent of our design parameters, i.e., (P1) they largely depend
on the differences in RTprops, and (P2) do not asymptotically
grow with our probe sizes. As a result, the relative impact of
these vanishes as we increase our delay/delay variations. We
found it hard to mathematically prove (P1/P2) and empirically
validated them (not shown).
We measure excess delay as the minimum RTT over the
“packets part of probe” in Fig. 8 minus the minimum RTT in
the slot before the probe.
5.4
Duration and number of slots
Duration of slots. Since slots allow us to coordinate probes,
all slots, including probe and cruise, need to have the same
duration, i.e., 4RTTs (§ 5.3.2). We conservatively set the
slot size as the 4× the maximum RTT observed in the
slot (for both probe and cruise slots). Note, slot durations
may differ across flows as RTTs may differ due to noise or
differences in RTprops. Empirically, FRCC works despite
this (§ 7). Our formal proofs assume that slot durations are
equal (Assumption 2.). We experimented with a design that
hard-codes a large enough slot duration, but deprecated this
as FRCC empirically worked without it.
Number of slots. When probes overlap, flows may under-
estimate capacity (and NC) and incorrectly decrease cwnd.
Underestimation occurs because excess delays add up (c
∆d is
larger so bC = E/c
∆d is smaller).
More slots decrease the probability of such overlaps at
the cost of increasing convergence time. We dynamically
set the number of slots to be linear in flow count as kc
NT, with
the intuition that c
NT = NG in steady-state. In transient state,
c
NT may not equal NG. To ensure enough slots, we set the
minimum number of slots to Kmin = 6. When there are too
many probes for the number of slots, the natural increase in
delay will increase c
NT and the number of slots. For practical
reasons, our implementation also clamps slot count above
(Kmax = 20). C.f. BBR [7] uses 8 slots. We investigate the
impact of the upper clamp empirically (Appendix E).
Note that with slot count linear in NG, while the probability
of some probes colliding is high due to the birthday paradox,
the probability of a particular flow colliding is low (§ B.5).
Thus, each flow has infinitely many rounds where its probes
do not collide, and it makes progress towards fairness.
Additionally, flows that collide yield bandwidth to other flows,
but each flow is equally likely to collide, so on average, the
flow throughputs are still equal (§ 6.4, § 7).
Jittery link
Fluid model
1 NCi, NTi,
rtputi, rRTTi
3 NCi[r + 1],
NT[r + 1]
2
c
NCi, c
NTi, [
rRTTi,
\
rtputi, bCi, bRi
Time
cwndi
cwndi[r+1]
±∆R, γR
Figure 12: Process for deriving state transition function.
Figure 13: Jittery link (CBR-delay model from [3]). NG flows, f1 to
fNG, on a dumbbell topology, with capacityC pkts/sec, infinite buffer,
and RTprop of Ri for flow fi. The jitter boxes can delay packets by
D seconds non-deterministically (or arbitrarily) to model (E1/E2)
errors in § 5. Ideal link uses D =0.
6
Analysis and proofs
We describe highlights of our analyses, with details in
Appendix C. We use three network models corresponding to
our error models (§ 4): (1) jittery link (E1/E2/E3) (Fig. 13),
(2) ideal link (E2/E3), and (3) fluid model (E3) only.
We analyze FRCC under four different settings, each
providing unique insights into the FRCC’s dynamics and
performance guarantees.
Our split of these four settings
is governed by the tractability of the analyses tools under
non-linearity (different RTprops and multiple bottlenecks),
stochasticity (probe collisions) and non-determinism (jitter).
§ 6.2 Ideal link, NG flows, equal RTprop, no probe collisions.
§ 6.3 Jittery link, 2 flows, equal RTprop, no probe collisions.
§ 6.4 Ideal link, 2 flows, equal RTprop, with collisions.
§ 6.5 Fluid model, different RTProps & multiple bottlenecks.
Based on our analysis of these settings, we conjecture that
FRCC guarantees bounded unfairness with high probability
(over the algorithm’s randomness in choosing the probe slot)
on well-behaved network topologies (i.e., full rank routing
matrix [36]), including those with jitter and multiple hops.
6.1
Approach
Our analyses proceed by deriving a state transition function
that describes how the system state evolves after each round
of FRCC’s cwnd updates. We use a three step process to derive
this function (Fig. 12):
Notation. We represent state in terms of the current and target
flow counts. We use the suffix [r+1] to denote state in next
round, ⟨NCi[r+1],NT[r+1]⟩, and no suffix for current round.
1 Fluid reference execution. We want to make statements
about the gap between flow throughputs and error between
our estimates and true values. However, due to (E1/E2), even
when all cwnds, link capacities, flow count are fixed (non-time
varying), there are variations in RTT and throughput. So there
2762    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 10] ---

is no single true value of RTT, throughput, or link fraction.
To deal with this, we define a “fluid reference execution”, to
define true values. Our proofs describe how these reference
values (or state) evolve over time. The real state, RTT, and
throughput hover around the reference values (§ 6.3).
We define the hypothetical fluid reference execution as
one that runs parallel to the real one but without (E1/E2). It
shares the same network parameters as the real execution
(e.g., C, NG, Ri, etc.). Given some initial cwndi, we define the
reference (true) values for rRTT, rtput, (and consequently,
NCi, NT), as the RTT and throughput in the fluid execution.
These are solutions to the two fluid model equations: (1)
rtputi = cwndi/rRTTi and (2) ∑irtputi = C. These yield a
unique solution to rRTTi and rtputi [36], and consequently
NCi (= C/rtputi) and NT (= (rRTTi −Ri)/θ). Note, we use
the same reasoning to define the excess delay created by a
probe of size E as ∆d =E/C.
2 Bounds on estimates. We respectively define ∆R and γR2
as additive error in a RTT measurement and multiplicative
error in a throughput measurement in the real execution
relative to the reference rtputi and rRTTi. These represent
cumulative errors due to (E1/E2). Using these, we derive
bounds on FRCC’s estimates ( [
rRTTi, \
rtputi, c
NCi, c
NTi) relative
to the reference state (similar to Eq. 5.2).
3 Next state(s). We plug-in the bounds into FRCC’s cwnd
update rules (§ 5.2). This yields the (possible) cwndi[r +1]
in the next round and consequently the next reference state
⟨NCi[r+1],NT[r+1]⟩, as a function of the current state, design
(γ, θ, etc.) and network parameters (∆R, Ri,C, etc.).
Our analyses study the evolution of this function, assuming
non-time varying link capacity and flow count. When these
change, we restart the evolution from a new initial state, similar
to CCmatic [1]. We show convergence for all initial states.
Assumptions. Since we model FRCC’s execution at the gran-
ularity of rounds, we make several simplifying assumptions
about the slot-level execution. For instance, we assume that
rounds and slots of flows align (they have the same durations
and start/end times). We assume that flows update cwnds
synchronously (i.e., all flows first make estimates, then update
their cwnd), in reality flows may update cwnd one-after-another
(sequentially) (we relax this assumption in § 6.4). We detail
all these assumptions and more in § C.2.
Apart from describing FRCC’s dynamics and performance,
the primary purpose of our analysis is to demonstrate that
FRCC correctly handles jitter—a worst-case (or adversarial)
element controlled by the network. Since, aspects like the
randomness we use to decide probing slots which affects
probe collisions are not in control of the adversary, we believe
it is okay to rely on numerical and empirical methods for
validating these components like any other CCA evaluation.
2While ∆R is a pure network parameter. γR depends on the RTT we
maintain. Larger θ decreases γR (γR is effectively
RTT
RTT±∆R , from \
rtputi
rtputi ).
These assumptions make our analysis tractable. Empirically,
FRCC works even though these assumptions do not hold (§ 7).
6.2
Ideal link (Theorem 6.1)
THEOREM 6.1. On an ideal link (Fig. 13) with equal RTprops,
assuming no probe collisions occur, under assumptions in
§ C.2, FRCC ensures fairness, i.e., every flow’s steady-state
sending rate isC/NG, and RTT is R+θNG.
Proof sketch. The proof (Appendix C) mathematically
describes for an arbitrary number of flows what we see in
Fig. 14 (a) for the behavior of two flows. NCi and NT move
towards NG, and in steady-state, ∀i.NCi = NT = NG. This
implies (1) 100% utilization (since delay = θNT = θNG > 0)
and (2) fairness (equal NCi imply equal throughputs, since
NCi =C/rtputi (definition of NC (§ 6.1)).
Our proof shows that with equal RTprops, there are no
(E2) errors and the ideal link is equivalent to the fluid model
(Lemma C.1). Thus, our estimates are error-free ( c
NCi = NCi,
c
NTi = NTi). We substitute these into the cwnd update to get the
next state, and state transition function (Eq. C.6, Eq. C.7).
We show that under the transition function, the gap between
NT and NG, i.e., |NT[r] −NG| decreases multiplicatively (or
exponentially fast) each round. Likewise, the gap between
NCi[r] and NG, decreases multiplicatively.
For the ideal link, our proof works for all design parameter
choices as long as they are non-zero and positive. Since there
are no errors in estimates, we do not need clamps on the cwnd
(i.e., δH =∞, δL =∞). Our probes just need to create non-zero
delay (γ>0, D >0), and we need to create non-zero seconds
of queueing per flow (θ>0).
6.3
Jittery link (Theorem 6.2)
THEOREM 6.2. On a jittery link (Fig. 13), with NG =2 flows,
both having equal RTprops, assuming no probe collisions,
and under assumptions in § C.2, FRCC bounds unfairness
(avoids starvation). Specifically, it ensures that the ratio of
steady-state flow throughputs (in the corresponding fluid
reference execution), i.e., rtput, is at most 6.6×.
Proof. The evolution of FRCC on jittery link is similar to ideal
link. The key difference is the state transition function gives a
set of possible next states instead of a unique next state and con-
sequently FRCC converges to region instead of a fixed-point.
The lemmas (Lemma C.6, Lemma C.7, Lemma C.8, proved
in § C.4), summarized in Fig. 15, show that for all initial
states, all trajectories (despite jitter) converge to the shaded
region, and then stay in that region. As a result in steady-state,
NCi ∈[6.6,6.6/5.6]. This implies that the reference through-
puts (rtputi) are at most off by 6.6× (as NCi =C/rtputi).
Since jitter can emulate different “effective” RTprops , the
real throughputs can be slightly off this guarantee: if jitter
doubles the RTT for one flow, but not the other, its throughput
halves, and the throughput ratio could go from 6.6× to 13.2×.
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2763


--- [Page 11] ---

1
2
3
4
NCi
1
2
3
4
NT
(a) Synchronous
1
2
3
4
NCi
(b) Sequential
1
2
3
4
NCi
(c) Full overlap
1
2
3
4
NCi
(d) Partial overlap (1)
1
2
3
4
NCi
(e) Partial overlap (2)
Figure 14: Evolution of ⟨NCi,NT⟩over rounds on ideal link for NG = 2 flows. In all the overlaps, NT moves towards 1. With partial overlap,
NCi increases (link fraction decreases) for the flow that witnesses combined excess delay (d) and decreases for the other flow (e).
NCi
NT
6.6/5.6
6.6
3.3
2.2
1.8
0.15
Lemma C.8
Lemma C.6
Lemma C.8
Lemma C.7 (Top)
Lemma C.7 (Bottom)
Figure 15: Evolution of ⟨NCi,NT⟩over rounds on jittery link.
(a) Partial overlap
(c) Full overlap
(b) No overlap
Probe 1
Probe 2
Probe 1
Probe 2
Probe 1
Probe 2
Figure 16: Probe overlap scenarios. Rectangles represent probe slots
during which cwnd is high. The red hatched portions show intervals
where flows measure excess delay. (a) Flow 1 measures combined
delay while flow 2 does not. (b) Neither flow measures combined
delay. (c) Both flows measure combined delay.
Note, we were only tractably able to write and check the
proofofTheorem 6.2 forNG =2 flows since the numberofstate
variables, and hence the solving time for Z3, grows with NG.
Parameters. There is a one-to-one relation between the
design/network parameters and the performance bounds (e.g.,
6.6× in the theorem). Given design/network parameters, we
find the performance bounds using binary search (§ C.4). We
iterated this a few times to find a reasonable combination
of parameters and performance bounds. We set the design
parameters as: γ = 4, α = 1, δH = 1.3, δL = 1.25. In terms
of the amount of jitter, our design works as long as: delay
is larger than jitter (θ > ∆R/2), delay variation is larger than
jitter (D > ∆R), and RTT is large enough to bound throughput
variations due to RTT variations (γR < 2).
Additionally, we also need θ∗NG > R for stability, as we
use the alternate cwnd update (§ 5.2), i.e., less stable update,
for jittery link proof. This condition is also needed for ideal
link if we use the alternate update.
6.4
Impact of probe collisions (overlaps)
Types of probe collisions. When the probes of two flows
collide, either one, neither, or both of them may underestimate
capacity, depending on exactly how their probes overlap
(Fig. 16). A probe underestimates capacity when it measures
the combined excess delay from multiple probes. Since we
take the minimum of RTT samples in the probe’s measurement
interval (TP), we measure the combined delay only if the
entirety of TP overlaps with another flow’s probe slot.
Transition function(s). We update the ideal link transition
function to include the impact of probe collisions by updating
c
∆d. Specifically, iftwo flows have probe sizes E1 andE2, the to-
tal excess delay is (E1+E2)/C. The flows could see either c
∆di
= Ei/C, or the combined delay. We substitute both these possi-
bilities for both the flows, to get different transition functions.
State trajectories. Fig. 14 shows the state trajectories of the
system under different alignment of probe slots. We get 5
different functions for the possible probe slot alignments. The
first two cases are when the probes do not collide. Two flows
may measure the same state and update their cwnds together
(synchronous), or one flow may first update the cwnd, causing
the second flow’s round RTT and throughput estimates ( d
rRTT
and \
rtput) to change before its cwnd update (sequential).3 In
both cases, the system state converges to the fair and efficient
fixed-point (NT =NCi =NG =2), shown by the green circle.
With probe collisions, both flows may measure the
combined excess delay (full overlap), or only one of them may
measure the combined excess delay (partial overlap). In full
overlap, both flows update their cwnd by the same ratio, and
this does not change their link fractions (no motion along the
NCi axis). With partial overlap, the flow that underestimates
capacity yields bandwidth to the other flow. Fig. 14 (d) shows
the perspective of the flow that yields bandwidth and (e) shows
the flow that receives bandwidth.
Note, for two flows, the state of one flow is enough to
represent the state of the system because NC2 =
NC1
NC1−1. (d) and
(e) are images of each other under this transformation. This is
because link fractions sum to 1, ∑i1/NCi =1. Since the fixed
point in (e) is ⟨1,1⟩, the fixed point in (d) is ⟨∞,1⟩.
FRCC is fair despite collisions. The phase portraits show
system evolution if the same transition function is taken in
every round. In reality, the system state will evolve under a
3If the first flow increases its cwnd, the updates remain synchronous
because the second flow’s \
rtput and d
rRTT do not change. The increased
cwnd increases RTT and decreases throughput of the second flow, these
measurements get filtered out by the max/min filters.
2764    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 12] ---

Link A
Link B
f0
f1
f2
Figure 17: Parking lot topology. Flow f0 gets observations from
both hops, f1, f2 only see a single hop.
0
100
200
RTT ratio
0
100
200
Tput ratio (long/short)
RTT ratio
1
2
4
6
8
Hops
0
20
40
60
Tput ratio (short/long)
hops2
hops
Figure 18: Throughput ratios at the fixed point with different
RTprops (Left), and parking lot topology (Right). The different
lines correspond to different choices of probe size (γD) relative to
the RTprop of the short flow (with γD/R ranging from 2−7 to 28).
Large probe size yields better (lower) throughput ratios.
superposition of these transition functions each taken with
some probability. (a), (b) move the system towards fairness
and (c) does not change fairness (no change to link fractions).
(d) and (e) do cause one flow to yield bandwidth to another,
but the system is equally likely to take any of these transitions.
This is because, both flows have equal slot and measurement
durations, and we resample probing slot in each round. Hence
they are equally likely to measure combined excess delay.
This explains why FRCC is fair despite probe collisions as the
effects of (d, e) cancel out and (a, b, c) do not cause unfairness.
Note, collisions do cause NT to decrease creating instability
and unfairness at short time scales (Appendix E).
6.5
Fluid model analysis (different RTprops
and multiple bottlenecks)
With different RTprops or multiple bottlenecks, the excess
delay (∆d) is no longer equal to the transmission delay of
the probe, i.e., ∆d̸ =E/C. This creates a bias in our capacity
estimate, and consequently rate allocation. Instead of equal
throughputs, FRCC’s throughput ratio may be as bad as the
RTT ratio (not RTprop ratio). With parking lot topology,
instead of proportional fairness [26] (i.e., a throughput ratio
of hops), FRCC’s throughput ratio may be as large as hops2.
Different RTprops. When the short RTT flow probes, the
excess delay is more than expected. Conversely, when the
long flow probes, the excess delay is less than expected. We
give intuition for the short flow probe. During the probe, short
flow’s rate increases and long’s decreases by the same amount.
However, since the long flow has larger RTprop, the packets
in its pipe reduce by a larger amount. These go into the queue,
increasing the delay beyond the probe’s transmission delay.
We compute the exact value of the biased excess delay using
the fluid model (Appendix D). This yields bias in bC, and con-
sequently bias in c
NC. We include these biases in the transition
function and solve for the fixed-point (i.e., next state = current
state). We use numerical methods to approximate the fixed-
point as we do not get closed-form expressions for the transi-
tion function in this analysis (Appendix D). Fig. 18 shows the
throughput ratios at the fixed-point. The ratio depends on the
size of our probes (i.e., γD) relative to the short flow’s RTprop.
With large probes, the throughput ratio approaches 1, while
with small probes, it approaches the RTT ratio between flows.
Multi-bottleneck parking lot topology. Fig. 17 illustrates the
parking lot topology where different flows witness congestion
signals from different number of hops. As a result, if f1 esti-
mates the queuing delay to be delay, then f0 witnesses a delay
of hops·delay. Since CCAs coordinate fairness through con-
gestion signals (§ 2), this creates bias in all end-to-end CCAs,
shifting the rate allocation away from max-min fairness [2, 26,
34] (equal rates for all flows). For instance, Copa/Vegas/FAST
achieve proportional fairness [26, 36], where flows using more
bottleneck resources receive proportionally less bandwidth.
While FRCC would achieve proportional fairness with just
the contract bias, the bias in FRCC’s capacity estimate results
in throughput ratios larger than proportional fairness.
Similar to the different RTprop case, we compute this bias
and FRCC’s fixed-point (Appendix D). Fig. 18 shows the
resulting throughput ratios, with FRCC’s throughput ratio
falling between hops and hops2 depending on the probe size.
7
Empirical evaluation
We evaluate FRCC with four goals in mind: (1) illustrate the
performance properties of FRCC, while (2) validating our
proofs, (3) measure performance relative to existing CCAs,
and (4) explore when FRCC breaks.
Implementation & Methodology. We implement FRCC in
the Linux kernel as a pluggable kernel module. We set FRCC’s
design parameters as guided by our jittery link proof (§ 6.3),
we set: γ = 4, α = 1, δH = 1.3, δL = 1.25, D = θ = 10 ms,
TR =30 seconds, and TP = 1RTT. Our whole goal was to scale
to arbitrarily large link capacities. Our proof shows that these
parameter choices work for all link capacities and RTprops,
as long as the buffers are large enough (§ 2, § 6.3). Note, even
though we set D =θ=10 ms, this is for worst-case jitter, our
design handles much more than 10 ms of jitter in experiments.
We compare against Cubic [16], Reno [18], BBRv1 [7]
(Linux kernel v5.15.0), BBRv3 [13], and Copa [5, 33]. We use
mahimahi [28] and mininet [9] to emulate and test a variety
of network scenarios. We perform various network parameter
sweeps. By default, we use a dumbbell topology withC=48
Mbps, R = 50 ms, NG = 3 flows, and buffer size = ∞(we set
buffer =3BDP for Reno/Cubic, otherwise they set cwnd =∞).
We use tcpdump at the senders to measure the throughput
and RTT. We study the link utilization, flow throughput,
fairness (Jain’s fairness index (JFI) [19], and throughput ratio

maxi,j
throughputi
throughputj

), RTTs (latency), and convergence time.
We run experiments for 5 mins, and measure these metrics in
steady-state (i.e., minute 3 onward).
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2765


--- [Page 13] ---

2
4
6
8
Flow count
0.6
0.8
1.0
JFI
FRCC
Copa
BBRv1
BBRv3
Cubic
Reno
2
4
6
8
Flow count
50
100
150
RTT (ms)
25
50
75
100
Link capacity (Mbps)
0.6
0.8
1.0
JFI
25
50
75
100
Link capacity (Mbps)
50
100
150
RTT (ms)
50
100
150
200
RTprop (ms)
0.6
0.8
1.0
JFI
100
200
RTprop (ms)
0
200
400
600
RTT (ms)
Figure 19: Parameter sweeps with ideal link. We omit RTT for
Cubic, it bloats buffers building very high delays and skews the plot.
Parameter sweeps without jitter. We sweep flow count (1
to 8 flows), link capacity (12 to 96 Mbps), and RTprop (10
to 200 ms). This is a wide sweep that is at the limits of what
mahimahi emulation can support. Fig. 19 shows that across all
sweeps—flow count, capacity, and RTprop—all CCAs achieve
fairness (JFI ≈1), except Copa, which struggles at high
RTprops. All flows maintain non-zero queueing in steady-state
yielding a link utilization of roughly 100% (not shown).
The RTT plots agree with the expected RTTs of the CCAs.
With increasing flow count, FRCC’s RTT increases linearly
by θ = 10 ms per flow (RTT = R + θNG). BBR’s RTT
also increases linearly.
It operates in cwnd-limited mode
(when NG > 1) and maintains αBBR packets (not seconds)
per flow (cwndi = 2bCi bRi +αBBR, RTT = 2R +NGαBBR/C [3]).
Copa’s RTT also increases linearly maintaining 1/δCopa
packets of queueing per flow (RTT = R+NG/(δCopaC) [3, 5]).
Reno/Cubic fill up buffers and have an RTT of 4R independent
of the flow count (RTT =R+buffer/C, buffer=3BDP)
Looking at the capacity sweep, FRCC’s RTT remains
constant regardless of link capacity. Similarly, Cubic and
Reno maintain constant RTT of 4R. In contrast, BBR’s RTT
decreases with increasing capacity as the seconds of queueing
(transmission delay) of its αBBR packets in queue diminishes.
Copa follows the same pattern, with its RTT decreasing as
capacity increases. This vanishing queueing delay (or delay
variation) with increasing link capacity is precisely what
leads to starvation under jitter. FRCC avoids this pitfall by
maintaining delay and delay variation that remain larger than
network jitter regardless of link capacity.
Finally, the RTT vs RTprop plot is also consistent with
the expected RTTs. The slope of RTT vs RTprop is 4 for
Reno/Cubic, 2 for BBR, and 1 for FRCC and Copa.
FRCC
Copa
BBRv1
BBRv3
Cubic
Reno
25
50
75
100
Link capacity (Mbps)
100
101
Tput ratio
0
20
40
60
RTprop ratio
100
101
102
Tput ratio
RTprop ratio
Figure 20: Jitter (different RTprops). [Left] Three flows with
RTprop of 10, 20, and 30 ms, with varying link capacity. [Right]
Two flows with varying RTprop ratio. FRCC’s throughput ratio is
between 1 and RTprop ratio even when RTprops are off by 60×.
25
50
75
100
Link capacity (Mbps)
100
101
Tput ratio
50
100
Jitter (ms)
100
101
Tput ratio
Figure 21: Jitter (ACK aggregation). Three flows with R =32 ms.
Flow f0’s path has 32 ms of ACK aggregation. [Left] Varying link ca-
pacity. [Right]VaryingamountofACKaggregation on flow f0’spath.
The absolute RTTs (and RTT ranking across CCAs) varies
depending on the design parameters, flow count, link capacity
(transmission delay), RTprop, and buffer size. Trends in RTTs
matter more than the absolute values.
Sweeps with jitter. We study two manifestations of jitter: (1)
different RTprops and (2) ACK aggregation. These are settings
where FRCC shines. Fig. 20 [Left] shows flows with slightly
different RTprops (10, 20, and 30 ms), FRCC/Cubic/Reno
yield close to equal throughputs (ratio ≈1). BBR causes
unfairness which increases with link capacity and ends up
starving the shorter RTprop flow (e.g., Fig. 1). Copa also
causes increasing unfairness with increasing link capacity.
To emulate ACK aggregation, we implement an aggregator
parameterized with a burst size in milliseconds and a burst rate.
The aggregator collects all ACKs in the burst size period and
sends them at the burst rate. We set the burst rate to ensure that
the aggregator does not become the bottleneck. We sweep the
link capacity in Fig. 21 [Left] and burst size in Fig. 21 [Right].
Copa and Cubic/Reno cause unfairness which increases
with link capacity, eventually starving flows. Copa starves the
flow with aggregation while Reno/Cubic starve the other flows
(Fig. 2). FRCC maintains roughly equal throughputs for flows
even when the jitter is 128 ms—10× what FRCC was tuned
to tolerate. BBR exhibits slight unfairness.
Vastly different RTprops and multiple bottlenecks. Fig. 20
[Right] shows throughput ratios of two flows with varying RT-
propratio. The throughputratios forallCCAs increase withRT-
prop ratio. FRCC’s throughput ratio is lower (more fair) than
other CCAs even when the RTprops are off by 64×. FRCC’s
throughput ratio lies between 1 and RTT ratio and is consistent
with our analysis (§ 6.5). Note, RTprop ratio > RTT ratio.
Fig. 22 shows results with the parking lot topology withC=
2766    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 14] ---

FRCC
Copa
BBRv1
BBRv3
Cubic
Reno
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Hops
100
101
102
Throughput ratio
hops
hops2
Figure 22: Parking lot topology. FRCC’s empirical throughput
ratio is between hops and hops2. We do not show BBRv3 as we have
separate VMs for BBRv3 and mininet (for emulating parking lot).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
80
Throughput (Mbps)
Figure 23: FRCC converges to fair rates as flows enter and leave.
Each line shows the throughput of a different flow.
100 Mbps and RTprop =10 ms for all flows. FRCC’s through-
put ratio lies between hops and hops2, consistent with our anal-
ysis (§ 6.5). The throughput ratio for Copa is ≈hops (propor-
tional fairness), while that for BBR/Cubic is worse than hops2.
Convergence time. Fig. 23 shows 8 flows competing on a 96
Mbps link with 50 ms RTprop. Each flow enters 90 seconds
after the previous one and runs for 8 × 90 = 720 seconds.
Practically, FRCC’s convergence time is slow and takes tens
of seconds to converge. FRCC takes O(log(BDP)) rounds to
converge. When there are four flows, a slot is 4 RTTs or 360
ms (RTT = R +θNG = 50+4∗10), and a round is kNG = 8
slots or 3 seconds. C.f. a round for BBR is 8∗R = 0.4 seconds.
8
Discussion
Summary. We presented FRCC, the first CCA that provably
achieves fairness despite network jitter, using our key insight
of of decoupling fair rate coordination. Our formal analysis
demonstrates that FRCC converges exponentially fast to ef-
ficient and fair rate allocations with bounded throughput ratios
even under worst-case jitter patterns. Our empirical evaluation
validates these theoretical guarantees, showing that FRCC
maintains fairness in scenarios where existing CCAs starve.
Limitations and future work. While FRCC represents
significant progress, three key limitations may need to be
addressed for a practical deployment: (L1) operation with
shallow buffers, (L2) coexistence with other CCAs, and (L3)
convergence time. Of these, we believe the convergence time
is the most critical. For instance, even widely deployed CCAs
like Reno, Cubic, and BBR struggle with shallow buffers [8]
and coexisting with each other [35].
We outline three promising directions for addressing these
limitations. First, to handle shallow buffers, a contract based
on packet loss [12, 25] rather than delay could be explored.
However, directly adopting Reno’s loss-rate encoding is insuf-
ficient, as its sawtooth behavior causes under-utilization when
buffers are smaller than the BDP. Second, our current contract
encodes information in the magnitude of delay. Future work
could explore encoding the fair rate in the frequency or pattern
of delay variations. A prior proposal for AIMD on delay [3] fol-
lows this direction, but we found this specific design can lead
to starvation on multi-bottleneck paths even without jitter [2].
Third, while FRCC’s asymptotic convergence time of
log(NGBDP) RTTs is competitive, its practical convergence is
longer due to (1) a long, multi-RTT probing slot, and (2) O
(NG) slots in a round. Further research on capacity estimation
could reduce the probing duration. Alternatively, an initial
deployment could trade theoretical robustness in favor of con-
vergence time. For instance, the long probing slot helps deal
with transient RTT variations with different RTprops and multi-
ple bottlenecks (Figures 9, 10, and 11). A shorter slot duration
and fewer slots per round would help improve convergence
at the cost of modest unfairness in those specific cases, while
still solving the core starvation problem in Figures 1 and 2.
Takeaways. Our work may influence the CCA landscape
in at least four ways. First, FRCC could be deployed with a
pragmatic tuning (as described above) or after further research
addresses its limitations. Second, parts ofFRCC (e.g., linkfrac-
tion coordination, link capacity estimation, transient/persistent
RTT variations) may inform other CCA designs. Third, further
research may conclude that fairness is a much harder problem
where end-to-end methods like FRCC come at an unbearable
cost, bolstering the case for deployment of in-network
solutions or informed over-provisioning of the Internet.
Finally, our design would not have been possible without
formal reasoning and worst-case modeling of the network.
We began by stating assumptions about the network and
desired performance guarantees, then worked backwards to
derive a CCA that meets these requirements. This (1) revealed
high-level key insights and (2) guided our low-level design
decisions. We believe this is a promising methodology in
general for developing robust network control algorithms with
predictable performance in challenging environments.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers and our shepherd,
Srikanth Sundaresan, for their comments that helped improve
our paper. This work was supported in part by NSF grants
CNS-2403026, CNS-2212102, CNS-2212390, CNS-2403026,
and CCF-2422130.
In memory of Prateesh Goyal
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2767


--- [Page 15] ---

References
[1]
Anup Agarwal, Venkat Arun, Devdeep Ray, Ruben
Martins, and Srinivasan Seshan. “Towards provably per-
formant congestion control”. In: 21st USENIX Sympo-
sium on NetworkedSystemsDesign andImplementation
(NSDI 24). Santa Clara, CA: USENIX Association, Apr.
2024, pp. 951–978. URL: https://www.usenix.org/
conference/nsdi24/presentation/agarwal-anup.
[2]
Anup Agarwal, Venkat Arun, and Srinivasan Seshan.
Contracts: A unified lens on congestion control robust-
ness, fairness, congestion, and generality. 2025. arXiv:
2504.18786 [cs.NI]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2504.18786.
[3]
VenkatArun, MohammadAlizadeh, andHariBalakrish-
nan. “Starvation in End-to-End Congestion Control”.
In: Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGCOMM 2022
Conference. SIGCOMM ’22. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2022.
[4]
Venkat Arun, Mina Tahmasbi Arashloo, Ahmed Saeed,
Mohammad Alizadeh, and Hari Balakrishnan. “Toward
Formally Verifying Congestion Control Behavior”. In:
Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGCOMM 2021 Con-
ference. SIGCOMM ’21. Virtual Event, USA: Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 1–16. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3452296.3472912.
[5]
Venkat Arun and Hari Balakrishnan. “Copa: Practi-
cal Delay-Based Congestion Control for the Internet”.
In: 15th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 18). Renton, WA:
USENIX Association, Apr. 2018, pp. 329–342. URL:
https : / / www . usenix . org / conference / nsdi18 /
presentation/arun.
[6]
L.S. Brakmo and L.L. Peterson. “TCP Vegas: end to
end congestion avoidance on a global Internet”. In:
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
13.8 (1995), pp. 1465–1480.
[7]
Neal Cardwell, Yuchung Cheng, C. Stephen Gunn,
Soheil Hassas Yeganeh, and Van Jacobson. “BBR:
Congestion-Based Congestion Control”.
In: ACM
Queue 14, September-October (2016), pp. 20–53. URL:
http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=3022184.
[8]
Neal Cardwell, Ian Swett, and Joseph Beshay. BBR
Congestion Control. Internet-Draft draft-ietf-ccwg-bbr-
01. Work in Progress. Internet Engineering Task Force,
Oct. 2024. 79 pp. URL: https://datatracker.ietf.
org/doc/draft-ietf-ccwg-bbr/01/.
[9]
Mininet Project Contributors. Mininet: An Instant Vir-
tual Network on Your Laptop (or Other PC) - Mininet.
[Online; accessed 2025-04-17].
URL:
https : / /
mininet.org/.
[10]
Mo Dong, Qingxi Li, Doron Zarchy, P Brighten God-
frey, and Michael Schapira. “PCC: Re-architecting
congestion control for consistent high performance”.
In: 12th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 15). 2015, pp. 395–
408.
[11]
Constantinos Dovrolis, Parameswaran Ramanathan,
and David Moore.
“What do packet dispersion
techniques measure?” In: Proceedings IEEE INFO-
COM 2001. Conference on Computer Communica-
tions. Twentieth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE
Computer and Communications Society (Cat.
No.
01CH37213). Vol. 2. IEEE. 2001, pp. 905–914.
[12]
Sally Floyd, Mark Handley, Jitendra Padhye, and J¨
org Widmer. “Equation-based congestion control for
unicast applications”. In: Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and
Protocols for Computer Communication. SIGCOMM
’00. Stockholm, Sweden: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2000, pp. 43–56. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/347059.347397.
[13]
google/bbr at v3. [Online; accessed 2025-04-17]. URL:
https://github.com/google/bbr/tree/v3.
[14]
Prateesh Goyal, Anup Agarwal, Ravi Netravali, Mo-
hammad Alizadeh, and Hari Balakrishnan. “ABC: A
Simple Explicit Congestion Controller for Wireless Net-
works”. In: 17th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 20). Santa
Clara, CA: USENIX Association, Feb. 2020, pp. 353–
372. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/
nsdi20/presentation/goyal.
[15]
Prateesh Goyal, Akshay Narayan, Frank Cangialosi,
Srinivas Narayana, Mohammad Alizadeh, and Hari
Balakrishnan. “Elasticity detection: a building block
for internet congestion control”. In: Proceedings of
the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference. SIGCOMM
’22. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Association for Com-
puting Machinery, 2022, pp. 158–176. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3544216.3544221.
[16]
Sangtae Ha, Injong Rhee, and Lisong Xu. “CUBIC:
A New TCP-Friendly High-Speed TCP Variant”. In:
SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 42.5 (July 2008), pp. 64–74.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/1400097.1400105.
[17]
Feixue Han, Qing Li, Peng Zhang, Gareth Tyson, Yong
Jiang, Mingwei Xu, Yulong Lan, and ZhiCheng Li.
“ETC: An Elastic Transmission Control Using End-
to-End Available Bandwidth Perception”. In: 2024
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
24). Santa Clara, CA: USENIX Association, July
2024, pp. 265–284. URL: https://www.usenix.org/
conference/atc24/presentation/han.
2768    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 16] ---

[18]
Janey C. Hoe. “Improving the Start-up Behavior of a
Congestion Control Scheme for TCP”. In: Conference
Proceedings on Applications, Technologies, Architec-
tures, and Protocols for Computer Communications.
SIGCOMM ’96. Palo Alto, California, USA: Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, 1996, pp. 270–280.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/248156.248180.
[19]
Rajendra K Jain, Dah-Ming W Chiu, William R Hawe,
et al. “A quantitative measure of fairness and discrim-
ination”. In: Eastern Research Laboratory, Digital
Equipment Corporation, Hudson, MA 21.1 (1984).
[20]
Dina Katabi, Mark Handley, and Charlie Rohrs. “Con-
gestion Control forHigh Bandwidth-Delay Product Net-
works”. In: SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 32.4
(Aug. 2002), pp. 89–102. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/964725.633035.
[21]
Gautam Kumar, Nandita Dukkipati, Keon Jang, Hassan
M. G. Wassel, Xian Wu, Behnam Montazeri, Yaogong
Wang, Kevin Springborn, Christopher Alfeld, Michael
Ryan, David Wetherall, and Amin Vahdat. “Swift: De-
lay is Simple and Effective for Congestion Control in
the Datacenter”. In: Proceedings of the Annual Con-
ference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data
Communication on the Applications, Technologies, Ar-
chitectures, and Protocols for Computer Communica-
tion. SIGCOMM ’20. Virtual Event, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2020, pp. 514–528. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3387514.3406591.
[22]
K.Lai andM.Baker. “Measuringbandwidth”. In: IEEE
INFOCOM ’99. Conference on Computer Communi-
cations. Proceedings. Eighteenth Annual Joint Con-
ference of the IEEE Computer and Communications
Societies. The Future is Now (Cat. No.99CH36320).
Vol. 1. 1999, 235–245 vol.1.
[23]
Kevin Lai and Mary Baker. “Measuring link band-
widths using a deterministic model of packet delay”. In:
Proceedings of the Conference on Applications, Tech-
nologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer
Communication. SIGCOMM ’00. Stockholm, Sweden:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2000, pp. 283–
294.
URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 347059 .
347557.
[24]
Steven H. Low, Larry L. Peterson, and Limin Wang.
“Understanding TCP Vegas: a duality model”. In: J.
ACM 49.2 (Mar. 2002), pp. 207–235. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/506147.506152.
[25]
Matthew Mathis, Jeffrey Semke, Jamshid Mahdavi, and
Teunis Ott. “The Macroscopic Behavior of the TCP
Congestion Avoidance Algorithm”. In: SIGCOMM
Comput. Commun. Rev. 27.3 (July 1997), pp. 67–82.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/263932.264023.
[26]
J. Mo and J. Walrand. “Fair end-to-end window-based
congestion control”. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking 8.5 (2000), pp. 556–567.
[27]
Leonardo de Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. “Z3: An
Efficient SMT Solver”. In: Tools and Algorithms for
the Construction and Analysis of Systems. Ed. by C. R.
Ramakrishnan and Jakob Rehof. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 337–340.
[28]
Ravi Netravali, Anirudh Sivaraman, Somak Das,
Ameesh Goyal, Keith Winstein, James Mickens, and
Hari Balakrishnan. “Mahimahi: Accurate Record-and-
Replay for HTTP”. In: 2015 USENIX Annual Tech-
nical Conference (USENIX ATC 15).
Santa Clara,
CA: USENIX Association, July 2015, pp. 417–429.
URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc15/
technical-session/presentation/netravali.
[29]
Adithya
Abraham
Philip,
Rukshani
Athapathu,
Ranysha Ware, Fabian Francis Mkocheko, Alexis
Schlomer, Mengrou Shou, Zili Meng, Srinivasan Se-
shan, and Justine Sherry. “Prudentia: Findings of an
Internet Fairness Watchdog”. In: Proceedings of the
ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference. ACM SIGCOMM
’24. Sydney, NSW, Australia: Association for Com-
puting Machinery, 2024, pp. 506–520. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672229.
[30]
Adithya Abraham Philip, Ranysha Ware, Rukshani
Athapathu, Justine Sherry, and Vyas Sekar. “Revis-
iting TCP Congestion Control Throughput Models &
Fairness Properties at Scale”. In: Proceedings of the
21st ACM Internet Measurement Conference. IMC ’21.
Virtual Event: Association for Computing Machinery,
2021, pp. 96–103. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3487552.3487834.
[31]
Rayadurgam Srikant and Tamer Ba¸sar. The mathemat-
ics of Internet congestion control. Springer, 2004.
[32]
SymPy. [Online; accessed 2025-04-25]. URL: https:
//www.sympy.org/en/index.html.
[33]
venkatarun95/genericCC. [Online; accessed 2025-04-
17].
URL: https : / / github . com / venkatarun95 /
genericCC.
[34]
Weitao Wang, Masoud Moshref, Yuliang Li, Gautam
Kumar, T. S. Eugene Ng, Neal Cardwell, and Nandita
Dukkipati. “Poseidon: Efficient, Robust, and Practical
Datacenter CC via Deployable INT”. In: 20th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Imple-
mentation (NSDI 23). Boston, MA: USENIX Associa-
tion, Apr. 2023, pp. 255–274. URL: https://www.
usenix . org / conference / nsdi23 / presentation /
wang-weitao.
[35]
Ranysha Ware, Matthew K. Mukerjee, Srinivasan Se-
shan, and Justine Sherry. “Modeling BBR’s Interac-
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2769


--- [Page 17] ---

tions with Loss-Based Congestion Control”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Internet Measurement Conference. IMC
’19. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Association for Com-
puting Machinery, 2019, pp. 137–143. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3355369.3355604.
[36]
David X. Wei, Cheng Jin, Steven H. Low, and Sanjay
Hegde. “FAST TCP: Motivation, Architecture, Algo-
rithms, Performance”. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking 14.6 (2006), pp. 1246–1259.
[37]
Keith Winstein and Hari Balakrishnan.
“TCP Ex
Machina: Computer-Generated Congestion Control”.
In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2013 Confer-
ence on SIGCOMM. SIGCOMM ’13. Hong Kong,
China: Association for Computing Machinery, 2013,
pp. 123–134.
URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 /
2486001.2486020.
A
Artifact Appendix
Abstract. We release (1) FRCC’s Linux kernel module
implementation, (2) code for theoretical analysis and proofs,
and (3) scripts to run and plot empirical experiments.
Scope. We hope our artifact allows others to verify our the-
oretical and empirical claims as well as build upon our work.
For the theoretical analysis and proofs, we include code to
reproduce Figures 14, 15, 18 and Theorems 6.1, 6.2.
For the empirical experiments, we include code to reproduce
Figures 1, 2, 19, 20, 21, 23. We do not include code to
reproduce experiments with BBRv3 and the parking lot
topology (i.e., Figure 22) as we have separate VMs for these
experiments.
Contents. Our artifact is organized across three repositories:
(1) https://github.com/108anup/frcc/tree/main. This is
the main repository that includes the other two repositories
as submodules. It contains documentation and the code
for reproducing FRCC’s theoretical analysis and proofs.
(2) https://github.com/108anup/frcc_kernel/tree/
main.
This contains FRCC’s Linux kernel module
implementation.
(3) https://github.com/108anup/cc_bench/tree/main.
This contains the scripts for running and plotting empirical
experiments.
The
main
repository (https://github.com/108anup/
frcc/tree/main) contains a detailed README.md documenting
dependencies, setup, known issues, and commands for
reproducing all the experiments.
Hosting. At the time of submission, the main repository
(https://github.com/108anup/frcc/tree/main)
is
at
commit 4cedada281fb2d7df04f6dad476a30e44be6fd19 on
the main branch.
This commit includes the kernel and
benchmarking repositories as submodules.
Requirements. The artifact does not require specialized
hardware. Since our artifact modifies the kernel through the
kernel module, we recommend running experiments in a
virtual machine or on a dedicated host. All evaluations in the
paper were performed on an x86_64 server-class machine
with 64 cores and 256 GB RAM, allowing multiple concurrent
experiments. Users with fewer resources can scale down the
degree of concurrency (see README.md for details).
B
Design details
B.1
FRCC Pseudocode
For simplicity we do not show (1) RTprop probes (§ B.4), and
(2) pacing the probe’s gain and drain over an RTT (instead the
pseudocode just shows abrupt changes in cwnd) (§ 5.3), and
(3) pacing rate.
Algorithm 2: FRCC pseudocode.
1 Function OnACK(Seq ack, RTT rtt)
2
updateEstimates(ack, rtt)
3
if probing & shouldInitProbeEnd() then ▷See § 5
4
cwnd ←prev_cwnd ▷Drain probe’s excess
5
end
6
if slotEnded(ack, rtt) then ▷See § 5
7
if probing then
8
probing←False
9
updateCwnd() ▷See Alg. 1
10
end
11
if shouldProbe() then ▷See § 5
12
startProbe()
13
end
14
startSlot() ▷Reset d
sRTT (if not probing)
15
end
16
if roundEnded() then ▷kNmax slots elapsed
17
▷Reset d
rRTT, \
rtput
18
end
19 end
20 Function updateEstimates(Seq ack, RTT rtt)
21
bR ←min(bR,rtt)
22
d
rRTT ←min( d
rRTT,rtt)
23
if probing & partOfProbe(ack) then ▷See § 5
24
c
∆d =min(c
∆d,rtt−d
sRTT)
25
else if not probing then
26
d
sRTT ←min( d
sRTT,rtt)
27
\
rtput ←max(\
rtput,cwnd/rtt)
28
end
29 end
30 Function startProbe()
31
probing←True
32
c
∆d ←∞
33
prev_cwnd ←cwnd
34
c
NT ←( d
rRTT−bR)/θ
35
E ←max(γc
NT\
rtputD,1)
36
cwnd ←cwnd+E
37 end
2770    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 18] ---

RTT aligned interval
Tput1 = cwnd1/RTT1
Tput1 = C
Tput1 = 0
Flow 2
Flow 1
C
Y
X
Z
Figure 24: Measuring \
rtput over non-RTT-aligned intervals can
yield a measurement of 0 orC. Measuring over RTT-aligned intervals
better matches throughput.
B.2
Probe size derivation
Under our probe size (E =γc
NT\
rtputD), we derive the impact
of ∆R noise in c
∆d on our bC estimate and consequently its
impact on deciphering which of NC or c
NT is bigger.
We used this derivation in inverse (from bottom to top) to
derive the probe size in the first place.
bC = E
c
∆d
=
E
∆d±∆R =
CE
E±C∆R
We get the last equality by substituting ∆d =E/C. Substituting
our probe size,
bC =
Cγc
NT\
rtputD
γc
NT\
rtputD±C∆R
Substituting bC into c
NC computation,
c
NC =
bC
\
rtput
=
Cγc
NTD
γc
NT\
rtputD±C∆R
Substituting c
NC in,
c
NT
c
NC
= γc
NT\
rtputD±C∆R
CγD
=
c
NT\
rtput
C
± ∆R
γD
SubstitutingC=NC·rtput (definition of NC (Appendix D)),
c
NT
c
NC
= \
rtput
rtput
c
NT
NC
± ∆R
γD
Note, we define the “true” quantities ∆d, NC, rtput based
on the fluid model and define ∆R as error in observations in
jittery link relative to fluid model (§ 6.1, § C.1). This is why it
is okay to use the substitutions ∆d =E/C andC=NC·rtput.
B.3
Measuring throughput over packet-timed
RTTs
We argue that for cwnd-based CCAs (1) \
rtput should be mea-
sured over intervals aligned with packet-timed RTTs (i.e., the
interval starts with sending a packet and ends with receiving its
ACK), and (2) that measuring over multiple aligned intervals
(to get longer intervals) provides no additional benefit.
As shown in Fig. 24, the throughput measured over non-
RTT-aligned intervals can be anywhere between 0 andC (the
link capacity). This occurs due to packet interleaving across
flows and exists even on ideal links without jitter. Specifically,
in interval X , only packets of flow 1 are served, resulting in
throughput equal to C, while in interval Y , only packets of
flow 2 are served, yielding zero throughput for flow 1.
In contrast, in the RTT-aligned interval Z , the packets
ACKed, between sending a packet and receiving its ACK,
are exactly those that were in flight when the packet was sent,
which equals the flow’s cwnd. This gives a throughput estimate
of cwnd/RTT, where RTT is the round-trip time seen by the
last ACK in the interval. While this RTT value may contain
noise due to jitter, such noise can persist indefinitely under our
network model, causing the same throughput measurement to
repeat. Consequently, throughput measurements over multiple
RTT-aligned intervals offer no improvement in the worst-case.
Note, this does not contradict [1], which showed that longer
measurement intervals yield better estimates, as this is true
for rate-based control. Specifically, with rate-based control,
packets transmitted (and ACKed) within an RTT may not
equal cwnd (when the cwnd cap is not hit, or if there is no cwnd).
Note, pacing may only partially address interleaving.
Jitter before the bottleneck can still reorder packets across
flows. Further, with cwnd-based control, pacing yields no
improvement over RTT-aligned estimates anyway.
B.4
RTprop estimate
We can only measure RTprop when queues are drained [7];
however, FRCC maintains θNG seconds of delay in steady-
state. To drain this queue, we launch RTprop probes every
TR = 30 seconds, similar to BBR [7]. During these probes,
FRCC reduces cwnd to 4 packets for one “max RTT”, a conser-
vative upper bound on the RTT of competing flows. This en-
sures that the probe lasts long enough for all flows, with poten-
tially different RTprops, to simultaneously observe the drain.
We set max RTT to “Rmax+ max slot delay”, where max
slot delay is the maximum of RTT−bR samples in the latest
slot. We use Rmax = 100 ms. This is similar to BBR’s RTT
probe duration of (hard-coded) 200 ms [7].
Note, this only works if the RTprop probes occur together.
We assume that senders’ clocks are synchronized and launch
the probe every 30th second on the clock. This keeps our
implementation simple. Today, NTP (network time protocol)
makes it relatively easy to get clock synchronization with <
10 millisecond-level accuracy. Note, this accuracy depends
on RTprop between NTP servers and senders, and not on the
RTprop between senders or between senders and receivers.
Note that we could instead use BBR’s mechanism of
launching RTT probes when the bR expires (i.e., 10 seconds
elapsed since bR last changed) to implicitly synchronize the
RTT probes. In our empirical evaluation, BBR’s RTT probe
always synchronize regardless of injected jitter, though we
do not have a formal proof for this.
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2771


--- [Page 19] ---

B.5
Probability of probe collisions
If there are kN slots and N flows probing. The probability of
a particular flow not colliding is:
kN−1
kN
N−1
→e−1/k as N →∞
Hence, the probability of a particular flow colliding is bounded
by 1−e−1/k.
C
Proof details
C.1
Preliminaries
Fluid reference execution. Say flow fi has congestion
window cwndi, round-trip propagation delay Ri. We look at
the execution of these choices on a fluid model of the network
with link capacityC and infinite buffer.
Under this execution, below we define “reference” state
variables: (1) “current flow count” (from the point of view flow
i) (NCi), and (2) “target flow count” (NT). Recall, the current
flow count is inverse of the fraction of link the flow consumes,
and target flow count is based on the contract’s target delay
function, i.e., NT =ContractFunc(delay)=delay/θ.
NT solves∑
i
cwndi
rRTTi
=∑
i
cwndi
NTθ+Ri
=C
(C.1)
NCi = ∑jrtputj
rtputi
=
C
rtputi
, with, rtputj =
cwndj
rRTTj
(C.2)
For Ri = R, NT = ∑icwndi−CR
Cθ
(C.3)
We also define “rRTTi” (= NTθ + Ri) and “rtputi” (=
cwndi/rRTTi) as the “reference” RTT and throughput values.
Summary of notation. We track four variables:
rRTTi,
rtputi, NCi, NT (Table 2).
For each of these variables there are: (1) values in the ref-
erence execution, and (2) estimates maintained by the FRCC.
Further, all these quantities change as rounds progress. We
use the following notation to differentiate between these uses.
• Symbols without any annotation or with [r] suffix (e.g.,
rRTTi or rRTTi[r]) denote the state variables in round r
of the reference execution. We also use symbols without
[r] suffix to refer to state after a probe (in addition to at
boundaries of rounds).
• Symbols with hats (e.g., [
rRTTi[r]) denote the estimates or
state variables maintained by FRCC.
• As a shorthand we drop the [r] suffix when clear from
context, e.g., we use c
NCi[rF]= c
NCi[r+1] and c
NCi to denote
state in the next round and current round respectively.
C.2
Assumptions
Since our analyses are at the level of rounds, we make several
assumptions about the slot-level behavior.
“The purpose of abstraction is not to be vague, but
to create a new semantic level in which one can be
absolutely precise.” — Edsger Dijkstra
Assumption 1. RTprop probe works. We assume that
our RTprop probing mechanism works; i.e., flows can
simultaneously drain queues and get an RTT measurement
without queueing delays. This may still have errors due to
(E1/E2). Note, there is no error due to capacity probes (E3)
because FRCC stops any ongoing capacity probes when its
time for an RTprop probe.
Assumption 2. Slots align. Slots of flows are the same
duration. This is true for ideal link with equal RTprops (§ C.3).
On jittery link, slot durations may differ due to differences in
the RTTs of the flows. Further, with different propagation de-
lays also slot durations differ. Despite this our analyses yields
interesting and empirically valid insights (§ 6.3, § 6.5, § 7).
Assumption 3. Rounds align. Between two cwnd updates
of a flow, all other flows have a cwnd update. For the purpose of
analysis, we define rounds at the boundaries of such intervals
where each flow probes and updates cwnd exactly once. In
reality, a flow may probe twice between the probes of another
flow, e.g., a flow may probe at the end of one round and at
the start of the next round, without other flows updating their
cwnds in between. Note, when slot durations are the same,
there can be at most two cwnd updates of a flow between other
flow’s cwnd updates, as a full round needs to elapse between
the first and third cwnd update of a flow, during which all other
flows will probe at least once.
Assumption 4. Synchronous updates. (We relax this
for § 6.4) All cwnd updates occur synchronously. I.e., in a
round, all flows first update their estimates and then use these
to update their cwnd. In reality, the cwnd updates may happen
sequentially, i.e., one flow probes and updates their cwnd,
resulting a new reference state, then another flow estimates
the new state, and then updates its cwnd.
Assumption 5. At least one non-colliding cruise before
probe. Before every capacity probe, there is at least one cruise
measurement that does not collide with a probe of some other
flow. This ensures we get an estimate of [
rRTTi and \
rtputi
that is not biased by the probe of other flows (i.e., no impact
of (E3)). Note, our design ensures that there is at least one
cruise slot before a probe. Further, over a round there will
be many cruise slots that do not collide with probe (from the
pigeon-hole principle, there are kNG in steady-state and only
NG flows or probe slots). But all the measurements in the
cruise slot before a flow’s probe may collide with other probes,
we assume that this does not happen.
Assumption 6. Use alternate cwnd update. Only for
Theorem 6.2, we use the alternate update (line 6) instead of
the main update (line 7).
Assumption 7. Known RTprop and one-sided error in
RTT, throughput. Only for Theorem 6.2, we assume that
there is no error due to (E1/E2) in RTprop, i.e., ∀i, bRi = Ri.
We also assume that the error due to (E1/E2) in RTT and
throughput measurements is one-sided, i.e., RTTs only
increase due to noise and throughputs only decrease. This does
not hold in reality. Fig. 11 shows that RTTs oscillate and thus
2772    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 20] ---

can be both more or less than the fluid reference. Likewise, if
one flow’s throughput drops because of RTT inflation then the
other flows’ throughput increases with a closed-loop system.
We believe these assumptions are not needed for Theo-
rem 6.2. We made them historically and hope to remove them.
We designed our estimates so that errors vanish with increasing
delay and delay variations, and the polarity of the errors has
little consequence. For instance, for the capacity estimate, the
excess delay is a difference of two potentially erroneous RTT
measurements, and we model both positive and negative errors
in excess delay. Removing this assumption may change the
guidance on design parameter choices. However, empirically,
the current design parameters work fine (§ 7).
C.3
Ideal link
C.3.1
Bounds on estimates
LEMMA C.1. For an ideal link, with equal propagation
delays, when the link is utilized, and there are no cwnd changes,
there are no RTT variations due to (E2), i.e., effects of packet
interleaving or differences in feedback delay.
Proof. When the link is utilized, every 1/C seconds (i.e., a
transmission delay), a packet is dequeued by the bottleneck
link, due to the ACK-clock, this dequeue triggers an enqueue
exactly R seconds later (as all Ri =R). As a result every 1/C
seconds a packet is enqueued and dequeued, and there is no
variation in queuing delay or RTT. Note, this is not true when
RTprops are different, which is why we see the oscillations
in Fig. 10.
It suffices for us to look at the execution when the link is
already utilized, as FRCC ensures that the bottleneck link is
utilized exponentially fast. This is because there is at least
one flow in the network, and FRCC increases cwnd until, the
minimum RTT is 1∗θ more than R. As a result, there is always
a queuing delay, and link is utilized. So we can use Lemma C.1
in deriving the state transition function. This derivation then
works for states that start with a utilized link.
Due to Lemma C.1, since all RTTs are the same, they are
equal to rRTTi, and so our RTT estimates are correct: [
rRTTi =
rRTTi, c
∆di = ∆di, and bRi = Ri = R (equal RTprops, and draining
occurs synchronously (Assumption 1.)).
Further, since we measure throughput over packet-timed
RTT the \
rtput is cwnd/RTT which is same as the rtput
=cwnd/rRTT on the fluid reference (as all RTTs are equal to
rRTT due to Lemma C.1).
Note, we used the fact that updates are synchronous in
computing these bounds, i.e., the estimates are not impacted
by other flows’ cwnd updates within the round Assumption
4. (and consequently Assumption 3. and Assumption 2.).
We also assumed that probes do not collide and that there is a
cruise slot before the probe that did not collide with any probe
(Assumption 5.).
As a result, c
NTi =NT, bCi =C, c
NCi =NCi, i.e., there is no error
in estimation compared to reference execution.
C.3.2
Next state, and state transition function
Now, we derive how the state variables evolve over rounds.
We re-write the cwnd update equations (§ 5.2) given that the
estimates are the same as the reference state, and then consider
the reference state after all flows have updated their cwnd.
Note, in reality, flows may update their cwnd one by one (but
we assume updates are synchronous Assumption 4.).
Reference state after a round is (Eq. C.3):
NT[rF]= ∑icwndi[rF]−CR
Cθ
(C.4)
NCi[rF]= ∑icwndi[rF]−CR
Cθ
(C.5)
Substituting next cwnds, (i.e., cwndi[rF] = (1−α)·cwndi[r]+
α·target_cwndi, where target_cwndi = cwndi·NCi/NT), i.e.,
the alternate cwnd update (line 6) and simplifying:
NCi[rF]= NCi((1−α)NT+αNG)
(1−α)NT+αNCi
(C.6)
NT[rF]=(1−α)NT+αNG+ αR
θ
NG
NT
−1

(C.7)
Note, for the proof on ideal link, we do not need the clamps
(δH, δL). So we just use: target_cwndi =cwndi·NCi/NT. The
clamps are needed in the jittery link execution to bound the
impact of potentially wrong cwnd updates when estimates
have errors. Further, in the simplification, we also substituted
∑NG
i=1
1
NCi = 1 (follows from the definition of NCi in Eq. C.2).
We get the NG from ∑NG
i=11.
C.3.3
State trajectories (alternate cwnd update line 7)
We now follow these state update equations to see what
happens at round large enough (time large enough). This is
visualized in Fig. 14.
LEMMA C.2. NT →NG exponentially fast (as long as
NTθ>R).
Proof. Rewriting Eq. C.7, we get:
NT[r+1]−NG
NT[r]−NG
=(1−α)+α −R
θNT[r]
Based on this equation, if the magnitude of RHS is less than
1 (say 0 < |RHS| ≤β < 1), then the gap between NT and NG
decays exponentially fast. Here, |x| is the absolute value
(magnitude) of x.

NT[r+1]−NG
NT[r]−NG
=
(1−α)+α −R
θNT[r]
≤β
Substituting |NT[r]−NG| by x[r],
x[r+1]≤x[r]β
=⇒x[r+k]≤x[r]βk
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2773


--- [Page 21] ---

=⇒x→0, or NT →NG exponentially fast, as k→∞
The RHS is average of 1 and a negative number, so it is
always less than 1. We just need to show that it is greater than
−1. If NTθ>R, then RHS is >−1. If we set θ=2R (we know
R from Assumption 1.), then we just need NT >1/2.
Recall, NT comes from queueing delay in the reference ex-
ecution. Also recall that c
NCi =NCi ≥1 (NCi ≥1 from definition
of NCi in Eq. C.2). Whenever NT < 1, the cwnd for all flows
increases as target_cwnd = cwnd
NCi
NT = cwnd (≥1)
<1 > cwnd. As
a result, the queueing delay and in-turun NT increase. Once
NT > 1/2, it will not decrease below half, as the distance
between NT and NG always decreases (from the proof above)
and NG is always ≥1.
LEMMA C.3. Given NT =NG, NCi →NG exponentially fast.
Proof. Substituting NT =NG, and x[r]=
NG
NCi[r] in Eq. C.6, we
get:
NG
x[r+1] = NG
x[r]
NG
(1−α)NG+α NG
x[r]
=⇒x[r+1]=(1−α)x[r]+α
=⇒x[r+k]=(1−α)kx[r]+(1−(1−α)k)
=⇒x→1, or NCi →NG exponentially fast, as k→∞
C.3.4
State trajectories (main cwnd update line 6)
While
target_cwndi
=
cwndi· c
NCi/c
NTi (line 7) was
the
alternate
target
cwnd,
our main
target
cwnd
is:
target_cwndi =cwndi·(Ri+ c
NCiθ)/(Ri+ c
NTiθ).
This update is more stable/robust than the original one.
Specifically, this does not require NTθ>R.
Under the main target_cwnd choice , the state variables
evolve as (by substituting the new cwnd in Eq. C.4 and Eq. C.5):
NT[r+1]=(1−α)NT+αNG
(C.8)
NCi[r+1]=NCi
R+θ((1−α)NT+αNG)
R+θ((1−α)NT+αNCi)
(C.9)
LEMMA C.4. NT →NG exponentially fast.
Proof. From NT state update equation (Eq. C.8):
NT[r+k]=(1−α)kNT[r]+(1−(1−α)k)NG
=⇒NT →NG exponentially fast, as k→∞
LEMMA C.5. Given NT =NG, NCi →NG exponentially fast.
Proof. In Eq. C.9, substituting NT =NG, and re-writing:
NCi[r+1]−NG
NCi −NG
=
R+θ(1−α)NG
R+θ((1−α)NG+αNCi)
Since NCi ≥1 (from the definition of NCi, i.e., Eq. C.2), the
RHS is <1, also RHS >0 (as all quantities are non-negative).
Say 0<RHS≤β<1, then:
=⇒NCi[r+1]−NG
NCi −NG
≤β<1
=⇒NCi[r+k]−NG ≤(NCi[r]−NG)βk
=⇒NCi →NG exponentially fast, as k→∞(as βk →0)
Note, since α = 1, without clamps, FRCC actually converges
NT in 1 round with the main update and NCi in 1 round with
the alternate update.
C.4
Jittery link
C.4.1
Bounds on estimates
We compute bounds on the estimates made by FRCC,
assuming each RTT can increase by up to ∆R/2 and throughput
can decrease by γR due to (E1/E2) (Assumption 7.). As a
result, the error in a RTT difference measurement is ±∆R
(since (R1±∆R/2)−(R2±∆R/2)=(R1−R2)±∆R).
In these estimates we do not incorporate impact of (E3). We
assume there is a cruise measurement before probe that does
not overlap with other probes (Assumption 5.), hence (E3)
errors for cruise slot estimates (\
rtput, d
rRTT, bR) get filtered
out by max/min. The theorem statement also assumes probes
do not collide so (E3) does not affect capacity estimate.
1. bR = R. We have assumed that bR is correct (no error)
(Assumption 1., Assumption 7.).
2. [
rRTTi ∈[rRTTi,rRTTi+∆R/2].
3. \
rtputi ∈[rtputi/γR,rtputi]. This implies that
C
\
rtputi ∈
[NCi,NCiγR] asC/rtputi =NCi. We will use this later.
4. c
∆di ∈[Ei/(C+∆R),Ei/(C−∆R)]. (For bCi in c
NCi).
5. c
NTi =( [
rRTTi−Ri)/θ∈[NT,NT+∆R/2θ]
6. Error in current flow count estimate:
c
NCi =
bCi
\
rtputi
= Ei
c
∆di
1
\
rtputi
= γ \
rtputi c
NTiD
Ei/C±∆R
1
\
rtputi
=
γc
NTiD
γ \
rtputi c
NTiD/C±∆R
When D ≥∆R,
=
γc
NTi
γ \
rtputi c
NTi/C±1
SubstitutingC/ \
rtputi derived in step 3:
c
NCi ∈
"
NCi
γc
NTi
γγR c
NTi +NCi
,NCi
γc
NTi
γc
NTi −NCi
#
(C.10)
2774    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 22] ---

Note, we used the fact that updates are synchronous in
computing these bounds, i.e., the estimates are not impacted
by other flows’ cwnd updates within the round Assumption
4. (and consequently Assumption 3. and Assumption 2.).
Note, the upper bound in Eq. C.10 may be very big (e.g.,
when NCi is close to γc
NTi). The clamps on c
NCi allow us to
manage the impact of errors during such situations.
C.4.2
Next state, state transition function
We re-write the cwnd update equations (using the alternate
update line 1, using Assumption 6.) given the errors in
estimates, and then consider the stabilized state after all flows
have updated their cwnd (Assumption 4.). In reality, not all
flows may update their cwnd in a round, and the flows may not
make measurements and updates in lock-step.
Consider the next reference state (Eq. C.3). We plug the
values of cwndi[rF] from line 1 in Eq. C.4 and Eq. C.5, and
simplifying, we get the following state update equations. Note,
these equations are in terms of c
NCi, this term is after the clamps
have been applied.
NCi[rF]= ∑j(∏k̸=jNCk c
NTk)((1−α) c
NTj +αd
NCj)
(∏k̸=iNCk c
NTk)((1−α)c
NTi +α c
NCi)
(C.11)
NT[rF]= R+θNT
θ
 
(1−α)∑
j
1
NCj
+α∑
j
d
NCj
NCj
1
c
NTj
!
−R
θ
= R+θNT
θ
 
(1−α)+α∑
j
d
NCj
NCj
1
c
NTj
!
−R
θ
(C.12)
We verified our algebraic steps using sympy [32]. To get
Eq. C.12, we used ∑NG
i=1
1
NCi =1 (from the definition of NCi, i.e.,
Eq. C.2). Also observe that if we substitute c
NTi = NT, and c
NCi
= NCi, we get the ideal link equations (Eq. C.6 and Eq. C.7).
For two flows, these equations simplify to:
NC1[rF]=1+ NC1 c
NT1((1−α) c
NT2 +αd
NC2)
NC2 c
NT2((1−α) c
NT1 +αd
NC1)
(C.13)
NT[rF]= R+θNT
θ
 
(1−α)+α
 
d
NC1
NC1 c
NT1
+
d
NC2
NC2 c
NT2
!!
−R
θ
(C.14)
These equations describe the reference state in the next
round as a function of the reference state in the current round
and estimates. In the previous section (§ C.4.1), we had derived
bounds on estimates relative to the reference state. Using these,
weobtain anexpressionsshowingboundsonthereferencestate
in the next round ⟨NCi[rF], NT[rF]⟩in terms of the reference
state in the current round ⟨NCi, NT⟩, and design/network pa-
rameters, eliminating all estimates (e.g., c
NCi,bCi, \
rtputi, [
rRTTi,
etc.). We do not show these expressions for brevity.
C.4.3
State trajectories. Lemmas in Theorem 6.2
We encode the transition function into Z3 to prove lemmas
about state evolution over rounds.
We ask Z3 to find a
counterexample to our lemma.
A counterexample is an
assignment to the variables, i.e., current state (⟨NCi, NT⟩),
design parameters (D, θ) and network parameters (C, R, D,
γR), for which our lemma evaluates to False. If Z3 outputs
UNSAT, i.e., there is no counterexample, then our lemma is
True. We also used Z3 to come up with the lemmas to begin
with. This is an iterative trial and error process where we
ideate lemmas, get potential counterexamples and update the
lemmas. We describe this process more in § C.4.4.
We list the lemmas part of Theorem 6.2.
We prove
these lemmas for the design parameters: γ = 4, α = 1,
δH =1.3, δL =1.25. Our design works whenever the network
parameters satisfy: D ≥∆R, θ∗NG > R, θ > ∆R/2, γR ≤2.
Note, θ ∗NG > R was also needed when analyzing the less
stable cwnd update in § 6.2. This was not needed for the more
stable cwnd update. We believe this will also not be needed
for the jittery link for the more stable cwnd update.
For readability, we use the following substitutions in our
lemmas:
NI
Ci =NCi[r]
NF
Ci =NCi[r+1]
NLB
Ci =
NUB
T
NUB
T −1 =6.6/5.6
NUB
Ci =6.6
NI
T =NT[r]
NF
T =NT[r+1]
NLB
T =0.15
NUB
T =3.3
NLB-BAND
T
=1.8
NUB-BAND
T
=2.2
σ=1.01
We obtained these non-trivial constants using binary search.
We find the most extreme values at which the lemmas continue
to hold. E.g., if we decrease NUB
Ci from 6.6 to 6.5, Lemma C.6
breaks. Note, these are worst-case performance bounds, i.e.,
over worst-case jitter patterns. Empirical performance of
FRCC is better § 7. Further, the lemmas also only describe
worst-case progress, e.g., NT may only show minor progress
(σ=1.01) when it is already close to converging, but it shows
major progress when it is far from converging because of
asymmetry in our capacity estimate (§ 5.3.1).
Note, these lemmas are for a two flow system (NG = 2)
with flowsfi and f j. Since NCj =
NCi
NCi−1 (from the definition
of NCi in Eq. C.2, along with NG =2), NCi represents the state
of both the flows, and we state the lemmas only in terms of
NCi without losing generality. The bounds NLB
Ci and NUB
Ci also
satisfy NUB
Ci =
NLB
Ci
NLB
Ci −1. As a result, NCi ∈[NLB
Ci ,NUB
Ci ] if and only
if NCj ∈[NLB
Ci ,NUB
Ci ].
The lemmas also assume that NT > 0 always.
When
NT < NLB
T
= 0.15, Lemma C.7 shows that NT increases
multiplicatively, so as long as we start with NT > 0, NT > 0
will keep remaining True.
NT > 0 is true whenever the
bottleneck queue occupancy is non-zero (this also ensures
that the bottleneck link is utilized). It is okay to assume
NT > 0 because FRCC increases cwnd whenever c
NTi < 1
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2775


--- [Page 23] ---

(because there is always at least one flow in the system). Since
c
NTi ≤NT+∆R/2θ (§ C.4.1), as long as ∆R/2θ < 1 (which is
what we are designing for), c
NTi will always be < 1, whenever
NT ≤0, so FRCC will keep increasing cwnd (multiplicatively),
so that NT >0 happens exponentially fast.
LEMMA C.6 (NT and NCi bounded). If initial NT and NCi are
converged to a bounded range, then they remain converged.
I.e.,
NI
Ci ∈[NLB
Ci ,NUB
Ci ] =⇒NF
Ci ∈[NLB
Ci ,NUB
Ci ] and,
NI
T ∈[NLB
T ,NUB
T ] =⇒NF
T ∈[NLB
T ,NUB
T ]
LEMMA C.7 (NT converges). If initial NT is outside its
bounded range, it converges towards the range exponentially
fast without overshooting (e.g., if it is above the range it does
not reduce to a value below the range), I.e.,
NI
T >NUB
T =⇒
 NF
T ≤NI
T/σ∨NF
T ≤NUB
T

∧NF
T ≥NLB
T and,
NI
T <NLB
T =⇒
 NF
T ≥NI
Tσ∨NF
T ≥NLB
T

∧NF
T ≤NUB
T
LEMMA C.8 (NCi converges). If either the initial NT or initial
NCi is not converged, then either both converge or two things
happen: (1) at least one of them (one that is not already
converged) improves (exponentially fast without overshooting)
while (2) neither moves away from the bounded range. I.e.,
¬(NI
Ci ∈[NLB
Ci ,NUB
Ci ]∧NI
T ∈[NLB
T ,NUB
T ])
=⇒(NF
Ci ∈[NLB
Ci ,NUB
Ci ]∧NF
T ∈[NLB
T ,NUB
T ])
∨((bad NCi improves∨bad NT improves)
∧NCi does not degrade
∧NT does not degrade)
Where “bad NCi improves” means that NCi is outside its
converged range, implies and it moves exponentially fast
towards the range without overshooting, i.e.,
NI
Ci >NUB
Ci ∧NF
Ci ≥NLB
Ci ∧(NF
Ci ≤NI
Ci/σ∨NF
Ci ≤NUB
Ci ) or,
NI
Cj >NUB
Ci ∧NF
Cj ≥NLB
Ci ∧(NF
Cj ≤NI
Cj/σ∨NF
Cj ≤NUB
Ci )
“bad NT improves” means that NT is outside the
[NLB-BAND
T
, NUB-BAND
T
] band, implies and it moves towards it
exponentially fast without overshooting:
NI
T >NUB-BAND
T
∧NF
T ≥NLB-BAND
T
∧
(NF
T ≤NI
T/σ∨NF
T ≤NUB-BAND
T
) or,
NI
T <NLB-BAND
T
∧NF
T ≤NUB-BAND
T
∧
(NF
T ≥NI
T∗σ∨NF
T ≥NLB-BAND
T
)
“NCi does not degrade” means that if NCi is not converged
then it does not move away from its converged range, i.e.,
(NI
Ci <NLB
Ci =⇒NF
Ci ≥NI
Ci)∧(NI
Ci >NUB
Ci =⇒NF
Ci ≤NI
Ci)
Similarly, “NT does not degrade” means:
(NI
T <NLB
T =⇒NF
T ≥NI
T)∧(NI
T >NUB
T =⇒NF
T ≤NI
T)
In “bad NCi improves”, you will notice that both the
conjunctions use the upper bound. Instead of writing the
second conjunction in terms of the lower bound, we write it
in terms of NCj which refers to the other flow. If NCi is below
its lower bound then NCj has to be above the upper bound.
This follows from NCj =
NCi
NCi−1 (from the definition of NCi
in Eq. C.2, along with NG = 2), and NUB
Ci =
NLB
Ci
NLB
Ci −1 (from the
constant values). We wrote it this way because the relative
change in NCi is higher when NCi ≥1≥NCj, (i.e., the flow that
is consuming lesser fraction of the link has higher relative
change in their fraction after the round updates).
We need the “neither degrades” part to ensure that the NCi
and NT do not oscillate in a way where one of them improves
and the other degrades and vice versa without making any
progress towards convergence. Similarly, we also need the
“one which is not converged improves”, or “bad” in “bad NT
improves”. If we replace “bad NT improves”, with just “NT
improves”, we would get “NT above the [NLB-BAND
T
,NUB-BAND
T
]
band implies it decreases and NT below the band implies it
increases”. This formula is true when NT is inside the band,
and as a result satisfies the post condition of the lemma without
forcing NCi to ever converge towards its range.
Summary. Going back to Fig. 15, if NI
T is outside its converged
range (top or bottom) then it eventually converges from
Lemma C.7. I.e., the system is in the left, center, or right
boxes in Fig. 15. If state is in the center box, we are done (i.e.,
system is in steady-state, it stays that way from Lemma C.6
and we deliver the steady-state performance bounds). Left
and right boxes are symmetric (one of NCi or NCj lies in the
right box if the system is in left or right boxes). Without loss of
generality, say NCi is in the right box. Then from Lemma C.8,
if NCi does not improve, then NT must move towards the
narrow band if it is outside the band, whenever it is inside the
band, NCi must improve. NT can exit the narrow band but not
leave its converged range, and the process repeats. NCi can
never move away from the converged range. The result of
these movements is that eventually NCi must converge. These
movements are shown using blue arrows in Fig. 15.
All the movements are multiplicative without any
overshoots, thus asymptotically the system converges to
steady-state in logarithmic steps in the total amount of
movement. Each step is a round that lasts forO(NG) slots, with
each slot being 4RTTs, and the total movement is bounded by
the steady-state cwnd =C/NG∗(R+θNG)= BDP/NG+CθNG
(this is cwnd FRCC maintains in steady-state on ideal link).
Giving a total convergence time of O(NGlog(BDP)) RTTs.
Note, NT may enter and exit the band multiple times, these
are all hidden in the big-O notation.
2776    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association


--- [Page 24] ---

C.4.4
How we come up with the lemmas
Coming up with the lemmas is an iterative process. We start by
identifying a region in the state space such that if initial state is
in the region, then the final state is in the region. This gives us
the shaded region. A rectangular region worked for us. Note,
the proof is not tight, the real region could be a different shape.
Then we ideate lemmas to describe motions the state makes
then it is outside the shaded region. Z3 may prove that the
lemma is correct, or give us a counterexample showing how
the state moves instead of what our lemma described. Based
on this feedback, we update the lemma and iterate.
D
Fluid model analysis (different RTprops and
multiple bottlenecks)
Different RTprops. We compute value of biased excess delay
from the fluid model as follows. Say in the current state, the
RTTs (not RTprops) of the two flows are R and ρR (i.e., RTT ra-
tio of ρ), and throughputs are fC and (1−f)C. Consequently,
the cwnds of the flows are: cwnd1 =R· fC,cwnd2 =R·(1−f)C
(using throughput = cwnd/RTT). When flow f1 probes, the
delay increase seen by the probe ∆d is given by:
cwnd1+E
R+∆d +
cwnd2
ρR+∆d =C
(D.1)
I.e., the RTTs of both flows increase by ∆d and the sum of the
throughputs during the probe are equal to C. We substitute
the cwnds and solve for ∆d as a function of ρ, R, E (γD), f,
and C. This expression is complicated and we do not show
it. But ∆d̸ =E/C. Note, if we substitute ρ=1 in Eq. D.1, then
∆d = E/C. If ρ > 1 (short RTprop flow probes), ∆d > E/C,
while ∆d <E/C, when ρ<1 (long flow probes).
Since ∆d is a complicated expression we not substitute it all
the way through to get an updated transition function, instead
we solve for the fixed-point indirectly. Specifically, the system
is in steady-state when no flow has incentive to change its cwnd,
i.e., c
NTi = c
NCi. Since flows measure the same queueing delay,
c
NT1 = c
NT2. Thus, steady-state happens when d
NC1 = d
NC2. We
substitute the biased ∆d in c
NC (= bC/\
rtput = E/(c
∆d\
rtput)).
We get c
NCi as a function of the system state and design/network
parameters. Solving d
NC1 =d
NC2, gives us the fixed-point state
as a function of design/network parameters. Note, in the fluid
model, hats ( c
NCi) and non-hat (NCi) variables are the same.
Solving d
NC1 = d
NC2 requires finding roots of a high degree
polynomial, we use numerical methods (secant method in
sympy [32]) to approximate the root.
Multi-bottleneck parking lot topology. The setup and
computation of the fixed-point is similar to the different
RTprop case. We write fluid model equations for each hop in
the parking lot. This time, the excess delay, ∆d, when the long
flow ( f0 in Fig. 17) probes is given by:
cwnd0+E
R0+∆d +
cwnd1
R1+∆d/hops =C
(D.2)
5
10
15
20
Number of ﬂows
0.6
0.8
1.0
JFI
FRCC
10
20
Number of ﬂows
50
100
150
RTT (ms)
FRCC
Figure 25: FRCC with more flows.
The main difference is that if before the probe the RTTs of
flow f0 (long flow) and f1 (short flow) were R0 and R1, then
after the probe the RTTs become R0+∆d and R1+∆d/hops
respectively. I.e., the increase in the RTT of the short flow
is 1/hops times less than the increase in the RTT of the long
flow. This is because the RTTs of all the short flow ( f1 to fhops)
increases and f0 witnesses the sum of the delays over all hops.
The delay at each hops is the same (due to symmetry fluid
equations for each hop). So the total increase in RTTs of all
the short flows matches the increase in RTT of the long flow.
When solving for the fixed-point, c
NTi = c
NCi. Due to the
same reason as above, this time, c
NT0 = hops c
NT1. So we solve
for d
NC0 =hopsd
NC1 to determine the fixed-point.
E
Supplementary empirical evaluation
Fig. 26 and Fig. 27 complement Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 to show that
BBRv3 and Reno also cause starvation in the scenarios with
different propagation delays and jitter.
Impact of upper clamp with higher flow counts. Fig. 25
shows FRCC with more flows. The upper clamp on slot count
is Kmax = 20, and the dynamic slot count is kc
NT, with k = 2.
With up to 10 flows the upper clamp is not hit and JFI is close
to 1. Beyond that there are less than kNG slots and collisions
become more likely creating some unfairness.
Note, since FRCC’s practical convergence speed is slow,
to ensure flows reach steady-state, we ran this experiment with
RTprop of 10 ms instead of our default of 50 ms (§ 7).
F
Glossary
Table 1 and Table 2 parameter and state variable definitions.
USENIX Association
23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation    2777


--- [Page 25] ---

0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
Tput (Mbps)
FRCC
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
Tput (Mbps)
BBRv1
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
Tput (Mbps)
BBRv3
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
Tput (Mbps)
Copa
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
Tput (Mbps)
Cubic
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
20
40
60
Tput (Mbps)
Reno
Figure 26: Flows with round-trip propagation delay (Rtprop or R)
of 10, 20 and 30 ms. BBR starves the (blue) flow with lower Rtprop.
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
25
50
75
Tput (Mbps)
FRCC
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
25
50
75
Tput (Mbps)
BBRv1
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
25
50
75
Tput (Mbps)
BBRv3
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
50
Tput (Mbps)
Copa
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
0
50
Tput (Mbps)
Cubic
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
25
50
75
Tput (Mbps)
Reno
Figure 27: Three flows with R =32 ms. The blue flow experiences
32 ms of ACK aggregation. Cubic and Copa starve flows.
Symbol
Unit
Domain
Description
Network parameters
C
r
R>0
Link capacity
BDP
p
R>0
Bandwidth delay product
Ri, R
s
R>0
Round-trip propagation delay
Di, D
s
Maximum network jitter per-packet
NG
u
Z≥1
Number of flows (ground truth)
∆R
s
Max (additive) error in RTT difference
γR
u
R≥1
Max (multiplicative) error in Tput
Design parameters
Rmax
s
R>0
Assumption about maximum R
D
s
R>0
Amount of ∆R we want to tolerate
θ
s
R>0
Delay we maintain per flow
γ
u
R>1
Gain multiplier for probing
α
u
(0,1]
cwnd update weight
δL, δH
u
R>1
Clamps for cwnd update
k
u
R>1
kc
NT = Number of slots in a round
TP
s
R>0
Probe duration (= 1 RTT)
TR
s
R>0
Time between RTprop probes (= 30 s)
Table 1: Glossary of parameters.
For the units: r = rate (i.e.,
packets/seconds), s = seconds, p = packets, u = unit-less. By default,
the domain is R≥0. Subscript i denotes quantity seen/maintained by
flow i. We drop the subscripts when clear from context.
Symbol
Unit
Domain
Description
cwndi
p
R≥1
Congestion window size
bCi
r
Link capacity estimate
bRi
s
R estimate
rRTTi, [
rRTTi
s
RTT in a round
rtputi, \
rtputi
r
Throughput in a round
NT, NTi, c
NTi
u
Target flow count
NCi, c
NCi
u
NCi ≥1,
c
NCi ≥0
Current flow count (from the
perspective of flow i)
Ei
p
R≥1
Excess packets sent by probe
∆di, c
∆di
s
∆di ≥0,
c
∆di ∈R
Excess delay due to probe
Table 2: Glossary of state variables. We use hats ( [
rRTTi) to denote
estimates made by FRCC, and no annotation (rRTTi) to denote the
value of the state variable in the fluid reference execution. We use
a suffix of [r] to denote the round number (e.g., rRTTi[r], [
rRTTi[r]).
See Table 1 for convention on units, domain, and subscript i.
2778    23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
USENIX Association
